World Economic and Social Survey 2014: Reducing Inequality for Sustainable Development
Introduction
Inequality has been discussed in the context of the formulation of the post-2015 development agenda. The present Survey is focused on the issue of inequality in the broad context of the three dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental. Pursuing greater equality is one of the fundamental values that are universally recognized and the Survey focuses on forging a consensus on the ways to proceed to reduce inequality. It seeks to inform a discussion on how Governments and other stakeholders can reduce inequality, which instruments may be deployed and what historical and recent episodes of reduction of inequality can teach us about the scope foróand the challenges toóreducing inequalities within a wide range of countries and contexts.  The Survey emphasizes that policy frameworks to reduce inequality would need to be designed and implemented in accordance with country-specific circumstances.
      High inequalities for prolonged periods make it more difficult to sustain economic growth. Recent empirical studies by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) show that countries with higher inequality are more likely to experience shorter growth spells.  In both developed and developing economies, rising inequalities have also been associated with excessive debt-financed consumption and investment patterns which may have then contributed to financial and economic crises. In addition, lower levels of investment in human capital (education health care in particular) tend to accompany high inequality making it more difficult to sustain growth. Inequality also reduces the impact of economic growth on poverty reduction. Concentration of assets has also been found to lead to suboptimal allocation of resources, with insufficient investment in productive sectors.
     The most recent Report of the World Social Situation 2013, Inequality Matters, highlighted that high and persistent inequality within countries represents a serious challenge in social terms, affecting the well-being not only of those at the bottom of the income distribution, but also those at the top. Inequality limits opportunities for social mobility, including intergenerational mobility. Furthermore, there is cumulative evidence that group (or horizontal) inequalities are associated with loss of social cohesion, fertile ground for political and civil unrest, instability and heightened human insecurity. 
     Inequality may hamper environmental sustainability, while environmental degradation may lead to increased inequality. Regarding climate change, for example, overwhelming evidence suggests that poorer people and poorer countries, which contribute minimally to the emissions that exacerbate global warming, and also have fewer resources to protect them from its consequences, are worse affected by climate change than their richer counterparts. In turn, as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) highlighted, climate change is likely to impact inequality: ìClimate-change impacts are expected to exacerbate poverty in most developing countries and create new poverty pockets in countries with increasing inequality, in both developed and developing countriesî.
     In this context, the Survey presents strategies, policy frameworks and measures to help inform governments and other stakeholders seeking to reduce inequality. To do so, it focuses on four areas in which policies can have a significant impact: the environment, employment, redistributive policies and global measures affecting climate change, taxation and migration. The adoption of any policy framework that seeks to improve income distribution will require strong national ownership and effective and legitimate processes of representation and inclusiveness, including non-governmental stakeholders and civil society forces. It would also require an enabling global environment that provides each country policy space to decide the pace and path towards sustainable development.
     Using a revised and updated database, this Survey uses income inequality as a broad proxy for many other types of inequality, even though income is undeniably an imperfect indicator of the many dimensions of inequality that determine human and sustainable development.  These various dimensions of inequality have been researched in-depth in recent reports by United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) in 2010, and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in 2013. In particular, the Report on the World Social Situation (RWSS) 2013 discusses disparities in several dimensions of well-being, including life expectancy at birth, child survival, nutrition and educational attainment. It also provides insights in rural-urban divides and challenges facing disadvantaged and marginalized social groups. To analyse the full range of dimensions of inequality is outside the purview of this Survey.
     The Surveyís focuses on inequality within countries as well as the broader global context of inequality between countries, because many of the drivers of national inequality relate to global processes, including technological developments and international flows of people, goods, services and finance, threats to environmental sustainability and climate change, among others. Any policy framework for national action will need to be underpinned by a supportive global context, with international collective actions in key domains such as trade, finance, environment and the mobility of persons. 
Income inequality across the globe
Income inequality can be measured at three different levels:  (a) within a single country; (b) between countries; and (c) global. Each of these three measures can be calculated using a statistical indicator such as the Gini coefficient, which captures income distribution in a single number ranging from zero (absolute equality) to one (complete inequality, with all income accruing to a single person or household). For simplicity, throughout the Survey the Gini will be presented as percentage points, on a scale of zero (absolute equality) to hundred (absolute inequality). 
     
     As will be shown in the Survey, overall, within-country inequality increased starting in the mid-1980s, and stabilized in the recent decade. Between-country inequality, based on average per capita incomes, has been falling since 2000. Global inequality, has remained stable but at a very high plateau. 
More people experience rising inequality in their country
The Survey shows that the level of inequality within countries has increased markedly during the last decades: 73 per cent of the worldís population lives in countries where inequality in 2010 was higher than it was in 1980. 
     Figure O.1 provides the Gini coefficients for income inequality since 1970 for six regions of the world; it shows sharply increasing inequality within-countries during the 1990s. Yet in this general context, we can also identify recent ëepisodesí of reduction in inequality at the regional level, particularly in some of the traditionally ìhighî inequality regions. For example, the significant decline in inequality observed in Latin America since 2002 is supported by a growing body of research that has documented the success of policies undertaken to reduce inequality in countries of that region. 
     Inequality in Asia increased sharply during the 1990s and remained at a high level during the recent decade. This Survey presents evidence that since 2007, inequality in Asia, measured at the level of disposable income, has been as high as that in Latin America. Europe (including the Russian Federation and Eastern European transition countries) experienced a sharp increase in inequality during the 1990s, whereas North America and Oceania had experienced a marked increase in inequality since the 1980s. 
     Overall, the weight of inequality reductions in Latin America has not surpassed that of the increases in the other regions. Inequality in Africa has been declining, although considerable uncertainty about the trend in this region remains on account of poor data. Household surveys in Africa over the past fifteen years have only been done in countries covering 75 per cent of the regionís population, well below the figure of 93 per cent for other regions across the globe. Nevertheless, at the aggregate global level, inequality within-countries across the globe has increased. Consequently, much of the world population (more than 73 per cent) is today living in a context of much higher income inequality compared with 30 years ago.
Between-country inequality has started to decline
Beginning from an already high level, between-country inequality continued to increase between 1950 and 2000, especially since the 1980s. In other words, average incomes between countries diverged, despite the fact that income growth per capita accelerated in many developing countries after the 1980s. However, a turning point after 2000 may be observed as divergence between national average incomes stopped and even reversed. This phenomenon was influenced by the recent slowdown of average per capita income growth in developed economies and the continued rapid growth in several developing and transition economies during the period 2001-2012. The short-term growth outlook for 2014-2015 also indicates continued convergence of average incomes, with forecasted gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the European Union (EU), Japan and the United States of America ranging between 1.2 per cent and 3.2 per cent per annum, and anticipated growth for Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa (BRICS ranging between 2.9 per cent and 7.3 per cent per annum). While some countries have converged to the highest income levels of developed countries, others have continued to diverge, but there has been an overall tendency for between-country inequality to decline.
Still, global inequality remains very high
Global inequality, which combines between- and within-country inequality, has remained very high. The methodology developed by the World Bank to aggregate across surveys remains the most accurate for assessing global inequality based on household income surveys. Comparing the first estimate (for 1988) with the most recent (for 2008), reveals a slight upward trend in global inequality. However, during this period, inequality did not follow a uniform pattern: there was a slight decrease both between 1993 and 1998 and after the peak of 2002 (See Chapter 1). A record in global inequality was reached in 2002, with a Gini coefficient above 70 percentage points. Since this year global inequality remained at a very high plateau and has changed very little, if at all.
     In fact, most of global income inequality can be explained by the between-country inequality component: that component represented two thirds of global inequality in 2000. However, as mentioned before within-country inequality has been on the rise over the last two decades in many developed and developing countries. It is this component upon which public policy actions by national governments and other stakeholders have an impact and hence it is an important starting point for tackling and reducing inequality.
What drives inequality?
The Survey considers a broad range of drivers of inequality, reflecting global as well as national forces, playing out at both the macro level and the micro level of households and individuals. Structural drivers of inequality encompass the unequal distribution of ownership of assets (physical, human and financial capital). Others drivers of inequality are often the consequence of national policies limiting access to education, access to financial services or to public goods and services.  Discriminatory practices, based inter alia on age, race, gender, ethnicity, nationality, religion and sexual orientation, may cause or reinforce inequality, as explored in RWSS 2013. Technological change and processes of globalization (including international trade and financial flows) may have increased inequality, between and within countries. Climate change and natural disasters may reduce environmental sustainability and result in greater vulnerability and reduced opportunity for livelihoods, resulting in inequality.  The Survey presents lists a comprehensive set of drivers of inequality, identifies mechanisms leading to persistence or increasing of inequality and suggests policy frameworks to tackle inequality (Chapter I).  
     	One important change in the last thirty years has been the increase of the capital share in world output. Overall, there has been expansion of financial markets worldwide without corresponding investments in the real economy, creating wealth through the rapid accumulation of debt and rising asset prices, rather than through productivity improvements and job creation.  
     In 1980 the total earnings for labour, including so-called ëmixed incomeí which captures income from self-employment and own-account work, amounted to around 62 per cent of world gross output, but by 2011 the  same had declined to 54 per cent. This severe decline of labour earnings at a global level is per definition mirrored in a concomitant increase of the earnings of capital income as a share of world GDP. With the major share of capital incomes accruing to the top 10% of income earners, this major shift of earnings away from labour and towards capital incomes has been driving increased income inequality across households and individuals. 

     Any analysis of inequality needs to take into account the institutional context and the specific historical, economic, social and ecological space in which it is embedded. What may affect or reduce inequality in one particular country context may not have the same impact in another, reflecting its specific context. The reduction of inequality will not necessarily require policy interventions addressing all of the above mentioned drivers. Countries and regions facing persistently high and sustained inequality (e.g. in Southern Africa) will need to adopt bolder measures than others (e.g. countries in parts of Europe and Asia). The need for bolder measures partly reflects the seriousness of the challenge, but also that effective redistributive measures are already in place in many countries with lesser inequality, for example, through social protection and progressive taxation.
Policymakers recognize the need to reduce inequality
The burgeoning literature on inequality has devoted much space to measurement and impact of inequality but less to policy frameworks that have worked to reduce it. Yet, across different countries and regions and at different times, a considerable range of effective policies designed to bring about greater equality have been adopted. A perception survey of 363 senior policy makers in fifteen countries across five regions found that the majority of them now recognize that inequality is ëÖnot likely to be compatible with long-term development goalsí.
     	
     The next section will illustrate the relationship between reducing inequality and its effects on the environment, one of the three dimensions of sustainable development.
Inequality and environmental sustainability
While inequalityís effect on economic growth and social development has been widely discussed, its effect on the environment has not received commensurate attention. This Survey presents evidence and arguments reflecting how less inequality within and across countries can be helpful for achieving environmental sustainability. 
Channels of inequalityís influence on environment
Inequality may affect the environment adversely through individual, community, national and international channels. At the individual level, inequality affects consumption behaviour in ways that may be harmful to the environment. At the community level, inequality generally hampers the collective efforts necessary for the protection of commonly owned environmental resources. At the national level, short-term and profit-driven objectives often dominate over broader and long-term societal goals, leading to environment-damaging national policies. At the international level the unequal economic and political might of nations makes it difficult for the international community to take the measures necessary for protection of the components of the global commons, such as the atmosphere and the oceans. 
     Examples of consumption behaviour serve to illustrate this. As regards the relationship between inequality and per capita consumption of water and of basic food items such as fish and meat and between inequality and the generation of municipal waste, it has been found that a higher level of inequality in income and asset distribution generally leads to more resource-intensive consumption per capita and also the generation of more waste. 
     A recent study examined the total ecological footprint of Canadian households belonging to different deciles of the income distribution. The study found that the richest 10 per cent of Canadian households have an ecological footprint of 12.4 hectares per capita, which is 66 per cent higher than the national average. The ecological footprint of the richest 10 per cent is about 2.5 times greater than that of the poorest 10 per cent. Canada is a country with modest inequality, in which the share of national income of the top-10 per cent of households in 2007 was 9.3 times that of the lowest 10 per cent. Breaking down the total ecological footprint into its components shows that most of the differences in ecological footprint are accounted for by mobility, i.e. travel (see Figure O.3). With respect to mobility, the footprint of the richest 10 per cent is 9 times higher than that of the poorest 10 per cent, reflecting e.g. frequent air travel. It is only with respect to food that the differences in ecological footprint across different income groups are not highly pronounced.
 Differences in ecological footprint across income categories are likely to be even more pronounced in most developing countries, where the consumption of the rich often differs from that of the poor not only in magnitude but also in kind. The rich of developing countries generally emulate the consumption pattern observed in developed countries. As a result, their consumption basket generally includes more components damaging to the environment, such as various non-biodegradable materials than does the consumption basket of the poor. 
     The adoption of national policies designed to reduce inequality can exert influence at several levels. They can influence individual behaviour; they can also impact communities and facilitate collective efforts of community members. Sustainable development requires sustainable consumption patterns. One of the important ways in which reduction of inequality may help is through such national policies directed towards promotion of sustainable consumption at all levels of society. There are also feedback effects (reverse causality flows) from deterioration of the environment to inequality. For example, diminution of open access forests and fisheries may reduce the real income of the poor, thereby aggravating inequality. These feedback effects further demonstrate the beneficial impact of reduction of inequality on protection of the environment.   
     The imbalances in natural resource access also tend to be exacerbated among other things by insecurity of land tenure, including for rural communities and indigenous peoples. In this respect, a number of countries have tried to reduce inequality by decentralizing natural resource management authority and sharing management responsibilities with local communities over the last few decades, thereby providing balanced economic, social and environmental benefits of natural resources to local communities and people.
     An important concern with regard to common-property resources (such as forests and water bodies) is the possibility of overexploitation. This problem has been dramatized as the ìtragedy of the commonsî in which with open access to a common-property resource, each individual has the incentive to extract and/or use as much as possible of it, disregarding the fact that emulation of such behaviour by others will lead to the exhaustion of the resource. Many saw the solution of this problem in privatization of common-property resources. 
     However, research shows that many communities found other efficient ways of managing common property resources to prevent their overuse (see, for example, Ostrom and others (1999)). Elements that have been found helpful in successful management of common property resources include (a) clearly defined boundaries of the resource; (b) a high degree of dependence on the resource so that exhausting it would pose a significant threat to the welfare of the co-sharers; (c) presence of a community that is small but stable characterized by dense social network and social norms; and (d) the existence of community-based rules and procedures that provide incentives for following those rules and mete out punishments for their violation. Research by Ostrom et al. (1999) and others confirms that equality in asset and income distribution within a community is conducive to the collective efforts necessary for the protection of environmental resources under common property. 
     The nexus between secure tenure of natural resources and poverty alleviation of the millions of people who depend directly or indirectly on those resources for their livelihoods is increasingly recognized. Most of the rural communities are poor, and access to natural resources is crucial for their livelihoods and survival. This raises issues of tenure rights and the recognition of customary rights in national legal systems. Many countries have already made major efforts in this direction, creating special tenure categories such as community forests, indigenous reserves and other types of communally owned land. However, in cases of conflict with outside stakeholders, such as private companies, the non-customary legal system often takes precedence, denying local communities access to natural resources they had been benefiting from so far.
     Moreover, in many cases, women tend to depend more on natural resources than men for food, medicine and fuel wood. Yet, women are almost systematically disadvantaged in terms of access to decision-making, leaving their voices unheard in natural resources policy-making processes. As a greater presence of women in community decision-making bodies leads to better protection of common property resources, the Survey argues for  greater gender equality in common property resource management as an important step towards achieving environmental sustainability.
International linkages between inequality and environment
At the international level the disparate economic and political interests of nations make it difficult for the international community to take the measures necessary for the protection of the global commons, including the atmosphere and the oceans. The Survey notes one way in which the world is changing: public good resources are becoming common property resources. In other words, globally shared resources such as the atmosphere and the oceans, once believed to be limitless, are becoming more polluted, congested, and degraded to the extent that use by one limits the potential use of others. A prominent example of this change concerns the atmosphere, which used to be a classic example of a public good, whose use by one person or country did not limit use by others.  However, safe carbon content limits may have been reached, if not already breached, and carbon emissions of one country leave less space for the generation of allowable carbon emissions by others without surpassing the safe limits. 
     Similar situations arise in connection with the oceans, another classic example of a global public good.  Thus, industrial fishing has led to depletion of fish stock in many parts of the oceans, so that fishing by one nation now leaves less for other nations. Rising atmospheric carbon concentrations are an important reason why temperature of the oceans is increasing, and glaciers are retreating, leading to the expansion of the volume of water, the rise in the sea level, and the submergence of low lying islands and countries.
     Yet, the narrowing of inequality between countries may lead to a wider distribution of economic power among nations of the world. Efforts should be made to make use of these changes to promote the protection of global commons. 
     The next section will assess how employment policies, affecting labour incomes which constitute the largest share of total value added, may be a means to reduce inequality, drawing from Chapter III of the Survey.  
Employment and reducing inequality
Major trends in global employment
     Employment creation has faltered during the past two decades. In recent decades, labour force participation rates have been stagnating, even when the global economy has been growing at the rate of 2-3 per cent per annum. At the same time, the quality of employment has deteriorated. In many developing countries and, more recently, in developed countries, employment growth has been increasingly in occupations, with non-formal contracts and unsafe conditions of work. The International Labour Organization estimates that in 2012, globally, the number of people in vulnerable employment was about 1.55 billion, compared with the number of people in formal employment (1.38 billion). About 1.5 billion people, representing half of total global employment, who reside mainly in countries of Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, earn less than US$ 4 per day.
Vulnerable employment and inequality
     Vulnerable employment has been a key characteristic of labour markets in developing countries. In 2012, vulnerable employment as a share of total employment was 56 per cent. Yet, although formal employment has also risen since the late 1990s, vulnerable employment remains a major component of employment in developing countries (ILO 2013).  Figure O.5 depicts the linkages between vulnerable employment and inequality.
 
The above figure presents the following stylized facts:
* The majority of high-income countries combine low levels of vulnerable employment with low inequality (south-west quadrant).
* Although low employment vulnerability can be associated with both low- and high-income inequality, a high share of vulnerable employment is often associated with high inequality (i.e. lower-right quadrant has very few countries).
* Countries with a high vulnerable labour share and high inequality are mainly low-income and lower middle-income countries (north-east quadrant).  
* A necessary, but not sufficient, condition for reducing inequality appears to be reducing the share of vulnerable employment.
Wage and employment policies for reducing inequalities
An integrated employment framework conducive to the reduction of inequalities includes macroeconomic policies that support living wages with wide access to high-quality social protection and social services, in tandem with incentives promoting environment-sensitive economic activities, long-term investment in physical and social infrastructures. This framework puts employment in the driverís seat of development and affirms its function as a source of economic security. It recognizes that the  quality of employment matters as much as its quantity and underscores that employment in the twenty-first century would have to be integrated into a sustainable development paradigm so as to reduce inequalities more effectively. The three dimensions of sustainable development, social development, economic development and environmental protection, would be geared towards creating employment in these areas, while also enhancing synergies among the enabling mechanisms, activities and sectors involved.
     Sustainable development represents an opportunity for structural transformation and creation of decent employment in activities related  to (a) development and use of renewable energy sources, (b) efficiency in the use of water, energy, land, forests and biodiversity resources across all sectors of society, (c) the building and upgrading of social infrastructures, e.g. schools, medical centres, housing, sanitation and public transportation, and (d) the use of adaptation technologies, management of green areas, and improved waste and recycling systems. The transformation process will need to be accompanied by supportive policies to protect workers in traditional sectors from the negative impact on employment such as e.g. through reskilling and training programmes.
     Employment of women and measures to raise their earnings should be accompanied by measures to raise access of women to higher education and investment in social reproduction services (e.g. day-care centres and co-parental leave plans); and thereby measures will broaden the reduction of inequalities and ensure a more effective achievement of sustainable development.
     Countries with inclusive labour-market institutions and active labour policies, including minimum wages, non-wage benefits and collective bargaining, tend to have a lower share of low-wage work, according to studies covering Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) member countries.   Recent evidence supports the view that such opportunities may also be realized in developing and emerging economies.  
     Active labour-market policies may reduce youth unemployment and enhance the realization of the demographic dividend by improving links between education, training and work. In response to the global economic crisis, Turkey introduced employment subsidies by publicly financing social security contributions paid by the employer for a period of up to 54 months for newly hired workers, depending on the age, status and qualifications of the employee. As a result, more than 125,000 new young workers (aged 18-29) were employed in 2009 and 2010. An additional 140,000 employees who had previously been unemployed for more than 3 months also found employment in those years.
     Since 2007, Ecuador has reduced inequality and poverty, as have other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. An integrated policy framework to support internal demand through a higher minimum wage and sharply increased public investment in infrastructure led the way towards sustained economic growth and reduction of inequality and poverty in a relatively short period. Complementary measures include (a) increased progressivity of the tax system; (b) increased reliance on direct taxation; (c) improved tax collection through controls and incentives; (d) zero taxes for agriculture; (e) renegotiation of contracts with oil multinationals; (f) a minimum living wageó(el salario digno)óof US$ 340 per month, reflecting the cost of the basic basket of consumption goods; and (g) reduction of interest rates. Within an international recessionary context, the economic growth performance was 7.8 per cent and 5.1 per cent during 2011 and 2012, respectively. The Gini coefficient fell from 53.9 in 2007 to 48.9 in 2010, faster than the average for the region (Cornia, 2014, p. 26).
     Thailandís recent minimum wage adjustment can boost GDP growth by 0.7 per cent and job growth by 0.6 per cent by 2015 according to estimates of the Economic and Social Survey of Asia and the Pacific 2013.
     A study of Latin American and Caribbean countries found that minimum wages positively affected the wage distribution in both the formal and informal sectors. In countries where the minimum wage was relatively low compared with mean wages, the minimum wage affected the poorest and most vulnerable - informal workers, women, young and older workers, and the low-skilled, among others. In countries where the minimum wage was relatively high, it mainly affected the wages of the highly skilled. International Labour Organization (ILO) observes that the effect of minimum wages on employment is small; the net effect on employment can be positive if it boosts effective demand. A further study of 18 Latin American countries for the period 1990-2009 found that the minimum wage exerted a modest but statistically significant equalizing effect. (Cornia, 2014, p. 38). 
     The next section analyzes the impact of redistributive policies on reducing inequality and the search for greater equity in a context of increasing inequality. 
Redistributive policies
Redistributive policies represent a powerful policy instrument for shaping the distribution of income and income-generating assets, such as human capital and wealth (including land, industrial and financial capital). Besides having a strong potential for reducing inequality, redistributive policies can also be key for promoting sustainable development, for instance, through the taxation of negative externalities arising from unsustainable production and consumption patterns, or the provision of incentives for productive investment, financial stability, or environmental sustainability.
Impact of redistributive policies
A common approach to assessing the impact of redistributive policies is to compare the distribution of income before and after direct taxes and transfers (i.e., income inequality at the market and the net disposable income levels). Figure O.6 reflects the evolution of the population-weighted global averages of the Gini coefficients for domestic market and net disposable income between 1970 and 2010. Both indices increased in tandem over that period. Income inequality increased rapidly starting in the mid-1980s, measured at either the level of market inequality or in terms of net disposable income. Since the early 1980s, the average population-weighted market Gini rose by 7 percentage points to 47,7 while the disposable/net Gini increased by almost 7 percentage points to reach above 44 per cent in 2010 (figure O.6). 
     Inequality appears to have stabilized after 2000 in the wake of the adoption of the UN Millennium Declaration, which led to a rehabilitation of public social spending for extreme poverty reduction, including through increased social protection. The impact of redistributive policies on income inequality, however, did not increase at the global level.
     The redistributive impact of direct taxes and transfers is significant in developed countries. Broad-based social protection measures stabilize the income of most vulnerable individuals and social groups, shielding them from extreme poverty. In Western and Northern Europe, for instance, direct taxes and transfers alone reduce income inequality by about 15 Gini points, four times the global average. By contrast, in developing countries, the predominantly rural and informal economic structures and weak tax administrations as well as narrow political coalitions often prevent the development of advanced tax administration institutions, thus fostering the creation of more unequal societies.
     Unlike health or education, social protection is not mentioned explicitly in the Millennium Development Goals agenda, but the focus of the Goals on reducing extreme poverty enabled limited improvements in the deployment of social protection in developing countries over the last decade. Overall, weaker public revenue mobilization has put a strain on the range of social protection programmes that can be funded, as well as on their quality and coverage. Since 2000 Latin America has experienced a progressive move towards a more rights-based approach to social spending, including social protection. This principle has shaped a number of new initiatives, such as a universal child allowance in Argentina, a universal old-age pension in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and an old-age pension, and disability, sickness and maternity benefits in Brazil. In parallel, key instruments of social policy for poverty alleviation and redistribution, including conditional cash transfers (CCTs), have been introduced in a number of countries. Non-contributory expenditures on social assistance in general, and on CCTs in particular, appear to have been quite effective in protecting the poorest segments of society (Cornia 2014), making the overall effects of redistributive policies more progressive. 
     In most developing countries, however, the approach to public social spending remains resource-constrained. In Central, East and West Africa, some social protection programmes are financed largely by official development assistance (ODA) and, in many cases, reflect the influence of international organizations and changing donor priorities from emergency and humanitarian aid towards social protection. 
     By focusing on raising public social spending, while neglecting to raise sufficient revenues in an equitable manner through progressive income and wealth taxation, most countries failed to equip redistributive policies with a solid backbone, as highlighted by the recent retrenchment in ODA. As acknowledged by the Group of Twenty (G20), revenue mobilization was already insufficient in many developing countries to fund progress towards achieving the MDGs; significant additional efforts are likely to be required as regards the post-2015 sustainable development agenda if it is to aim at fully eradicating extreme poverty and addressing salient social and environmental challenges, such as high income inequality and the breach of planetary boundaries. Progress towards equity and sustainable development is therefore conditional on building institutions and designing policies that enable a stepping up of revenue mobilization along with progressive redistribution of income and income-generating assets. Absent such progress, development efforts will remain dependent on international development aid and/or regressive debt financing (Hager 2013).
     In the wake of trade liberalization, tax reform in developing countries often emphasized regressive consumption taxes, which disproportionately burden the poor, as a means of replacing falling trade tax revenue, with mixed results, especially in low-income countries. Quick fixes, such as the creation of semi-autonomous revenue agencies focusing on value-added taxes, for instance, allowed revenue to be raised rapidly in some developing countries, but they failed however to do so in a progressive manner and further locked in administrative structures that were not conducive to adequate and progressive revenue mobilization and the development of modern integrated public administrations, which are required for state-building and sustainable development. 
The search for greater tax equity
Some countries have taken steps during the last decade to shape redistributive policies in support of inequality reduction and sustainable development, especially in Latin America. The new approach in that region was inspired by the search for greater tax equity and the principle of ìfiscal exchange,î according to which Governments can raise taxes if, at the same time, they raise the quantity and quality of services provided to a broad spectrum of the population (Cornia, 2014).
     In Latin America value added tax rates were left mostly unchanged, but in some countries excises on luxury goods were increased. Many countries placed more emphasis on progressive income taxation. Many countries placed more emphasis on progressive revenue mobilization by introducing progressive personal income taxes (e.g., Uruguay), a minimum tax on firms (e.g. Mexico) or by lowering the income per capita at which the highest direct marginal tax rate is applied. Most Governments eliminated a long list of exemptions, deductions and tax holidays benefiting transnational corporations, which had been introduced in the 1980s and 1990s to attract foreign investments without yielding the desired effects. 
     Presumptive taxation was also strengthened in response to the inability of the tax administration to ascertain the assets and income of potential taxpayers, and levied on the estimate of a person or firmís income calculated by tax authorities on the basis of objective indicators of gross turnover (e.g., assets, number of employees and electricity consumption). Taxation of self-employed taxpayers was also simplified. Several Latin American countries further introduced a tax on financial transactions yielding 0.3 per cent to 1.9 per cent of GDP, and Brazil raised more environmental tax revenue as a share of GDP than any other G20 country in 2011, except Turkey.
     Wealth remains highly concentrated at the global level, with the top 1 per cent owning 40 per cent of global wealth and the 85 richest individuals having an estimated net worth equivalent to that of the poorest half of the planet. At the domestic level, wealth is concentrated similarly, with the top decile controlling 70-90 per cent of total national wealth in many countries. 
     In most countries, wealth taxes currently target only immobile capital, mainly through residential property taxes. However, high-net wealth is accumulated mainly in financial assets, which are often concealed within opaque ownership structures maintained in tax havens and offshore financial centres (OFCs), well out of reach of domestic tax administrations. While domestic regulators could increase wealth taxes, including on mobile capital, part of the targeted tax base will always escape their authority in absence of an internationally coordinated and comprehensive crackdown on financial secrecy. Ongoing initiatives for the automatic exchange of information and creating registries disclosing beneficial ownership of trusts and other legal  structures are thus of fundamental importance for enabling governments to tap the huge potential of wealth taxation to support sustainable development.
International dimensions of reducing inequality for sustainable development
Owing to globalization and the increasing importance of environmental challenges of an intrinsically global natureómost notably climate changeósustainable development may no longer be viewed encompassing only national strategies for low- and middle-income countries. Indeed, it has become an increasingly global process, of which national development paths, in all countries, are components.
     The marked asymmetry in the degree of globalization of the factors of productionówith enormous mobility of financial and physical capital, partial mobility of human capital and much more limited mobility of unskilled labour at the global levelórepresents an important driving force of increasing inequality globally. This problem has been compounded by outflows of financial and human capital from low-income and least developed countries, where they are scarcest.
Global inequality and climate change
The IPCC (2014) highlights serious risks arising from climate change, including coastal and inland flooding; breakdown of infrastructure networks; threats to food systems and food security; loss of rural livelihoods and income; and loss of ecosystems and biodiversity. These risks will increase according to the degree of global warming experienced; and they disproportionately affect least developed countries and vulnerable communities, who have least capacity to cope with their consequences, implying an increase in inequality.
     The two-way relationship between inequality and climate change aggravates both: inequality contributes to climate change, whose impacts in turn tend to increase inequality, as the poorest people and countries bear the greatest impacts.  It is thus imperativeófrom the perspective of development and inequality, as well as environmental sustainabilityóto secure a binding global agreement designed to limit global carbon emissions to a sustainable level, while ensuring that development is not impeded. 
Migration, inequality and sustainability
In principle, one way of responding the asymmetry of factor mobility would be by increasing the mobility of unskilled labour through reduced restrictions on migration. In practice, however, movement has been in the opposite direction, particularly since the financial crisis, and a reversal appears unlikely in the short and medium term. 
     A more viable path would be to reduce global inequality by other means, thereby relieving the pressure for unskilled migration, while slowing the brain drain through improved working conditions in countries of origin and appropriately designed compensation mechanisms. 
     A simulation for selected Latin American countries conducted for the Survey suggests that increased remittances would reduce inequality in El Salvador and Nicaragua, but increase it in Honduras, reflecting the predominance of urban-based recipients of remittances in the latter. 
International tax coordination
The international mobility of financial capital imposes an important constraint on national redistributive mechanisms by impeding the taxation of capital income, limiting thereby both public resources and the progressivity of taxation.
     Possible measures for dealing with this issue include reduced concessions to foreign investors; increased transparency in international financial transactions, including in relation to secrecy jurisdictions and transfer price manipulation; global harmonization and regional coordination of tax policies; and, perhaps most important, the introduction of a global system of unitary taxation on transnational companies (TNC).
     Unitary tax systems already operate within some federal states, and a similar system is under consideration by the EU. Tax authorities levy taxes on a share of profits within the national (or regional) jurisdiction, the share being defined as a function of the proportion of the TNCís observable productive factors (e.g., employees, physical capital and sales) located in a particular territory. Unitary taxation based on global profits could be implemented either unilaterally, or in a globally coordinated way as an efficient way to neutralize harmful tax competition. It would have the advantage of addressing tax base erosion and profit shifting, which has become a salient issue, while also avoiding double taxation.While there has been some movement towards reducing concessions to foreign investors, this has been relatively limited, and further progress may be constrained by mandatory arbitration provisions in many recent bilateral trade agreements. To date, however, action at the international level, e.g., on transparency, has not focused sufficiently on developing countryís interests.
     It is particularly important, from the perspective of global inequality, to ensure that low-income and least developed countries benefit fully from progress in international tax coordination. It would also be helpful to allocate additional ODA to the development of administrative capacity for taxation in recipient countries, to ensure that aid reduces financial dependency instead of increasing it.
Global decision-making
Economic inequality and political inequality are closely inter-connected, globally as at the national level. The system of global governance is characterised by a number of features and structures which, in different degrees, institutionalise, facilitate or allow the dominance of decision-making by those countries with the greatest economic strength. These factors have contributed substantially to the continued failure to deal with climate change or to establish effective tax coordination at the global level.  As the World Bank concluded:
global actions can play a key role in redressing inequitable rules and helping equalize endowments. The rules that govern markets for labor, goods, ideas, capital, and the use of natural resources need to become more equitable.Ö Changes will require, above all, greater accountability at the global level, with greater representation of poor peopleís interests in rule-setting bodies.
     While there has been a partial shift of power from the developed countries to the emerging market economies, particularly since the financial crisis, least developed and low-income countries remain largely excluded. To tackle the inter-related challenges of global inequality and sustainable global development, it will be critically important to establish or strengthen inclusive and democratic structures, with effective representation of and accountability to all regions and country groupings on an equal basis, together with increased transparency and stronger and more equal accountability, not only to Governments but to the people they represent. 
Conclusions and Recommendations  
Within-country inequality has been on the rise over the last three decades. Public policy actions by national governments and other stakeholders can have an impact and hence this is an important starting point for tackling and reducing inequality. The Survey offers recommendations including the following:
* Policy frameworks to reduce inequality would need to be designed and implemented in accordance with country-specific circumstances.
* An integrated employment framework conducive to the reduction of inequalities including macroeconomic policies that support minimum living wages with wide access to high-quality social protection and social services, in tandem with incentives promoting environment-sensitive economic activities, long-term investment in physical and social infrastructures is required.
* Other pertinent policies include increased progressivity of the tax system, increased reliance on direct taxation, improved tax collection, minimum wage policies and reduction of interest rates.
* Redistributive policies can also be key for promoting sustainable development, for instance, through the taxation of negative externalities arising from unsustainable production and consumption patterns, or the provision of incentives for productive investment, financial stability, or environmental sustainability.
* A greater presence of women in community decision-making bodies leads to better protection of common property resources, hence greater gender equality in common property resource management as an important step towards achieving environmental sustainability.
* It is particularly important, from the perspective of reducing global inequality, to ensure that low-income and least developed countries benefit fully from progress in international tax coordination.
* The frequency, quality and coverage of integrated household income and expenditure surveys should be increased in developing countries to be able to assess progress in terms of reducing inequality and other indicators of human well-being.

Chapter I: Policy Frameworks for Reducing Inequality for Sustainable Development
Introduction
	The Survey will focus on the three dimensions of sustainable development: economic sustainability, in particular the avoidance of major fluctuations and macro-economic crises; social sustainability, in particular, the loss of social cohesion within societies, which can lead to conflict and violence; and environmental sustainability, in particular adopting a pattern of development which avoids dangerously rising carbon emissions and exhaustion of non-renewable natural resources. The Survey argues that reductions in inequalities would contribute to the attainment of progress along all these three dimensions of sustainability. While reducing inequalities will by no means be a sufficient condition for moving the globe on to a sustainable path, it will however be an important enabling condition.
    This Survey will be devoted to strategies, policy frameworks and measures which national governments and other stake holders can adopt to reduce inequality within their jurisdiction; therefore, the focus of the Survey is primarily on inequality within countries. The context of global inequality will also be considered because many of the drivers of inequality relate to global processes, including technological change and international flows of people, goods and services and finance, threats to environmental sustainability due to emissions and resulting climate change, and numerous others. While the drivers may be global, their impact is felt nationally and locally. Policy framework for national action will need to be underpinned by a supportive global context, with international collective actions in key domains such as trade, finance, environment and the mobility of persons. Questions of ëpolicy spaceí and policy coherence for national development strategies will need to be addressed. Hence, this Survey primarily examines the national dimensions of reducing inequality, but engages also the international dimensions.  
    The Surveyís focus on policy frameworks and strategies reflects the intent to go beyond forging a consensus on the desirability of reducing inequality. It particularly seeks to inform a discussion on how government and other stakeholders can reduce inequality, which instruments may be deployed and what the experiences of historical and recent episodes of reduction of inequality can teach us about the scope ñ and challenges - to reduce inequalities within a wider range of countries and contexts. This advocacy for the reduction of inequality reflects an interest in achieving inclusive economic growth with a major positive impact on social, economic and environmental objectives.    
    This Chapter will set the tone for the WESS 2014 and will provide a birdís eye view of changes in global, regional and national inequalities over the last five decades. The mainstay of the literature and analysis of inequality focuses on the economic and social impact and risks of high and persistent inequality. This Survey seeks to place the need for reducing inequality in the context of achieving sustainable development and observes that the environmental dimension has not received adequate attention. It reviews the linkages between inequality and environmental sustainability and notes that in terms of between-country inequality the links between different per capita income levels and emissions and ecological footprint are well understood. However, there is a need for further analysis and data of the linkage between environmental protection and inequality within countries, from the viewpoint of sustainable consumption and production patterns. An identification of ten drivers of inequality will provide the basis for identifying policy frameworks for reducing inequality (see below).
    In describing inequalities the Survey benefits from the fast growing literature around the globe, including the Report on the World Social Situation 2013 (RWSS), published by UN DESA. The Report suggests to tackle inequality, amongst others, through universalism in the provision of social services, reducing social exclusion, improving social protection, investing in education, strengthening labour market institutions, formulate appropriate fiscal and monetary policies and asset redistribution. This Survey examines these policy frameworks in greater depth and provides advice and evidence on the scope and challenges to reduce inequality through suitable policy frameworks, in ways compatible with the overarching goal of achieving sustainable development.
    This Survey uses income inequality as a very broad proxy for many other types of inequality, even though income is undeniably an imperfect indicator of the many dimensions that determine human and sustainable development.  Basic elements of human development are health, education, and living standards generally, but a full account of the dimensions of human development goes well beyond these three elements (for a discussion see (Nussbaum 2000, Alkire 2002,  Ranis, Stewart et al. 2006). The various dimensions of inequality have been subject of in-depth analyses in recent reports prepared by UNRISD (2010), UNDP (2013) and RWSS (2013).  To analyse the full range of dimensions of inequality is beyond the scope of this Survey. 
     
    Chapters 2 through to 4 of the Survey will elaborate the linkages between reducing inequality, primarily within the national contexts. Chapter 2 will focus on the linkages between environmental sustainability and inequality. Chapter 3 will focus on the primary means of achieving income for most individuals around the globe: the world of work, jobs and employment. Chapter 4 will focus on redistributive policies, seeking to stem the rise of continued and rising income and asset inequalities. Chapter 5 will focus on the international dimensions, which will need to be brought into play as these will be co-determining the scope as well as the limitations of national policies and interventions.
Part 1: Stylized Facts about Income Inequality across the globe
Global inequality remains high while more people face growing inequalities
	It is widely held perception that from a global perspective the level of inequality has increased quite dramatically over time. Whether or not this perception is supported by empirical evidence depends critically on the precise definitions and methods used to measure  inequality. Income inequality can be measured at three different levels:  (i) within a country; (ii) between countries; and (iii) global.
(i) within-country inequality measures inequality for a single country. This measure can be averaged at the regional or global level, and it can be weighted by population size to reflect the average level of domestic inequality experienced by the regional or world population. 
(ii) between-country inequality measures the inequality between the per capita GDP (or GNI) of all countries, without considering the distribution of income within countries. In effect, whether most of total GDP/GNI were to accrue to only a few persons or were distributed equally would have no impact on the measure of between-country of inequality. Between-country inequality can also be weighted by population size.
(iii) global inequality measures inequality of the whole world population as if there were no borders and the world was a single country. 
It is important to distinguish these three concepts or levels of inequality clearly right at the start, on an equal footing.  Global inequality is particularly challenging to compute, because it requires extensive (survey-based) income distribution data, in principle from all countries across the globe, which represents a very challenging task (see the six point estimates for the period between 1988-2008 in Figure I.1). Between-country inequality measures do not capture the inequality within countries. 
Most governments or national statistical offices regularly publish Gini estimates of income inequality along with a limited number of summary statistics about the precise shape of income distribution within countries. Gini estimates are usually based on survey data, but the level of income inequality could be assessed differently, using alternative measures and data sources. The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) and the Integrated Household Survey Network seek to create standardized methodologies to facilitate comparison over time and across countries. LIS also seeks to offer a platform providing direct access to this data for about 30 countries. However, to date most of the discussion on income inequality relies on Gini estimates published by national statistical offices, with major differences in definitions and coverage. 
Gini estimates are brought together in particular through the UNU-WIDER data-base, but comparison across countries is complicated, due to the host of different definitions and methods used across countries in the measurement of Gini and other inequality estimates. This Survey draws on and benefits from ongoing work to harmonize the various methods used in household income and expenditure surveys, in particular the work of the Luxembourg Income Study as well as the standardised inequality Gini estimates prepared by Prof Frederick Solt (2013).  
The population-weighted within-country Gini measures the average level of income inequality in a specific region or in the world, i.e. the level of domestic inequality experienced by the population in a specific region or in the world. An increase in population-weighted within-country thus indicates that an increasing share of the world population lives in a domestic context of rising inequality. The population weighted within-country inequality concept is used widely across this Survey. 
It is possible to define benchmark levels of inequality, describing ìlowî, ìmediumî or ìhighî inequality. Although these cut-off points or benchmarks will inevitably be subjective and hence may remain the subject of some controversy, the measure has the considerable merit if it is used over time, because it can show whether more people live in countries and contexts where they experience ìmediumî or ìhighî inequality. If so, it provides some basis for the proposition whether or not inequality has increased. Nevertheless, this method also has its limitations since countries with a large population size, such as China or India, will inevitably influence the overall increase or decrease of inequality, paying less attention to the empirical reality of other countries with smaller population sizes. 
There has been a general consensus that between-country inequalities have increased between 1950 and 2000, and especially since the 1980s. In other words, mean-incomes between countries have diverged, despite the fact of considerable faster income growth per capita in Asian countries after the 1980s.  In fact, after the 1980s many other developing regions faced serious economic challenges, while the developed economies were growing moderately fast. Several developing countries were facing a deep debt crisis thwarting growth, in particular in Latin America, whereas Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union countries experienced an absolute decline in income. 
According to the analysis of Milanovic (2012) there was a turning point after 2000: divergence between national mean incomes has stopped or even reversed. This was influenced by rapid growth in several developing and transition economies during the period 2001-20012: African countries grew around 4 per cent annually; Eastern European countries grew around 6 per cent; and Latin American countries grew around 3 per cent. The short-term growth outlook for 2014-15 also indicates continued convergence, with the forecasted GDP growth in the EU, Japan and the US ranging between 1.2 to 3.2 % per annum, while the anticipated growth for the BRICS ranges between 2.9 and 7.3% per annum. However, it is worth pointing out that while some countries have converged, others have continued to diverge.   
Despite the recent convergence trend between developing and developed countries, between country inequalities remain historically high with a Gini close to .55 (see Figure I.1). For instance, the GDP per capita jumped 19-fold between 1820 and 2001 in developed countries, while the performance of the rest of the world was much more modest: the mean income of Latin America was multiplied by 8, in Asia by 7, and in Africa only by 3.5. It is also worth mentioning that between-country inequalities are much higher than previously estimated when the 2005 PPPs were taken into consideration.
With regards to global inequalities, the methodology developed by Milanovic seems the most accurate to assess this indicator. However, most countries have only conducted household income surveys since the late 1980s and data limitations must be kept in mind. In particular, the national household survey as a source usually under-records the income of the top 1 % of the income recipients. Because of this the global inequality estimates presented in Figure I.1 may still need to be regarded as an underestimate.    
Comparing the first estimate (1988) and the last (2008), global inequality shows a slight upward trend, contradicting other studies that had observed a downward trend during the same period.  The Gini coefficient of global income inequality increased from 0.682 in 1988 to 0.696 in 2008. However, within this period, Gini estimates do not follow a uniform pattern: for example, there was a slight decrease between 1993 and 1998 as well as since the peak of 2002.  
The new record in global inequality in 2002, with a Gini coefficient above 0.70 confirms that global inequalities are much larger than inequalities within countries. In addition, in the same year, the top decile of the global population controlled more than 55 per cent of global income, up from 51.5 per cent in 1988. The most recent trend estimates of global inequality during the period 2002-2008 would support the view that global inequality had been decreasing during this period as the Gini declined (from 0.705 to 0.692). However, such decline as reflected in the three observations during the period 2002 to 2008 is ëwithin one-standard error of the calculated Gini coefficientsí. At this time, the data collected after the global financial crisis data have not yet been incorporated in this assessment. Hence, any interpretation about increasing or decreasing global inequality needs to be made with the necessary caveats ñ however, if is safe to say that global inequality has remained at a very high plateau, changing very little.
In sum, most of the global income inequality can be explained by the ìbetween-countryî inequality component: the share of that component represented 2/3 of global inequality in 2000. This reflects the fact that average national incomes per capita became increasingly unequal throughout the twentieth century. However, the share of the ìwithin-countryî component has been on the rise in recent years, confirming the significant rise of national inequalities in both developed and developing countries. It is in particular this component of inequality upon which public policy actions by national governments and other stakeholders will impact and hence the starting point of tackling and reducing inequality.
More people live in countries characterised by increased inequality
This Survey is mainly concerned with within-country inequality. Overall within-country inequality has increased starting in the mid-1980s.  But there are marked differences in the patterns of inequality over time and across countries and regions. 
Figure I.2 below provides the Gini coefficients for income inequality since 1970 for the six regions of the world (population weighted). It shows a context of increasing inequality within-countries, which is reflected in the global average. In this context of overall increase of inequality, we can however identify also recent ëepisodesí of reduction in inequality at the regional level, particularly in the ëhighí inequality regions, such as Africa, Asia and Latin America. The decline in inequality observed in Africa over the last decade, however, seems rather mild and is likely to remain the subject of controversy given the limited availability and the poor quality of estimates. The significant and continuous decline in inequality observed in Latin America, however, is in line with the findings of a growing body of research that has documented the success of policies undertaken to reduce inequality in Latin American countries (in particular Cornia, 2014). 
Income inequality in Latin America and the Caribbean region was reduced until the mid 1980s, to rise again during the 1990s. However, since the early 2000s the region has seen a marked and significant decline of inequality. According to available estimates, Africa also experienced a decline in the levels of inequality within countries, although the measurement of inequality in Africa is less accurate than in other regions and hence the results need to be interpreted with great caution. In sharp contrast, Asia experienced a steady increase in income inequality since the mid-1980s, driven by China whose Gini more than doubled in a 20 year time-frame, before experiencing a plateau in the 2000s.
This Survey finds that there is now sufficient reason to support a tentative conclusion that inequality, measured at the level of disposable income in Asia grew higher than that in Latin America since the latter years of the first decade of this century. Europe (including the Russian Federation and Eastern European transition countries) experienced a sharp increase in inequality since 1990, whereas North America and Oceania experienced a marked increase in inequality since the 1980s. Overall, inequality reductions in Africa and Latin America do not outstrip the weight of the increases in the other regions and inequality within countries increased globally.  
Inevitably the above broad regional aggregate estimates mask specific country patterns and differences. There is major variance within these broad regions, as shown throughout this Survey as well as in its Annex Table A.I on ëpatterns of income inequality over time by countryí. The annex also notes the urgent need for greater efforts to implement integrated household surveys across the globe and in particular in the African continent. 
Income inequality changes mainly affect the top and bottom of the population
In a seminal article, Palma, 2011 observed that a striking similarity of the income share accruing to the population deciles D5 to D9 based on a sample of 132 countries across all regions and across all per capita income groups for the year 2005. The main stylised fact is that the income share of these groups of the population are relatively constant over time with an average of 51.7 per cent and the median value is 52.2 per cent. This homogeneity of income share is sharply in contrast with the income shares accruing to the top decile of the population (D10) as well as the bottom 40 percent of the population (D1-4) ñ this is where most of the changes in the income distribution happen. 
The heterogeneity of the tails is captured by noting the coefficient of variation for these subsets of populations across the globe. The top-decile of the population (D10) on average gains 32 per cent of the total income, with a high coefficient of variation of 0.22, reflecting a wide range of income shares from nearly half of the income to just over a quarter. (Palma, 2011, p13-21 and Fig 14). The bottom forty per cent of the population (D1-4) gains an income share ranges from 7 to 24 percent, with a higher coefficient of variation of 0.25.  As Palma notes, the ëÖhigher degree of heterogeneity at the very top and bottom of the income distribution makes simple income ratios, particularly those of ëD10/D2í and ëD10/(D1-4)í more statistically-sensitive indicators of distributional disparities across the worldÖí.  
Cobham and Sumner (2013) assess the robustness of the claim that the income share of the ëmiddle classesí, defined as the recipients of the income deciles 5 through to 9 is a constant share of the total national income over time. They corroborate that this ëstylized factí is empirically supported by calculating the variance of the income share of these five deciles for a sample of 79 countries for which data is available for or near to 1990 and for or near to 2010. They conclude that the variance over time and across countries at different stages of development is indeed small (although not zero), corroborating Palmaís original observation. In contrast, the variance for the lowest income four deciles is much higher, as indeed is the variance for the highest income decile. In other words, changes in the income inequality of a particular country are largely explained by the changes at the top and at the bottom and this holds over time.  Cobham and Sumner also show that the ranking of the countries in terms of inequality using either the Palma or the Gini is strikingly similar (though not identical). 
One main conclusion drawn by Palma from this stylised fact of a stable share of income of the middle population deciles is that ëÖcountries with high inequality are simply those in which the rich are more successful at subsidising their insatiable appetite with the income of the bottom 40 per cent. The direction of policies that genuinely aim to reverse this state of affairs is therefore clearí. Palma points to the difference in the Gini coefficients describing  pre- and post-tax income (i.e. the difference between gross and net income). He notes that these are much greater in the EU than, for example, in Latin America. He identifies income tax evasion as ëan obvious place to startí (Palma 2011, p.34). This proposition will be examined in this Survey in much greater depth in Chapter 3.
Labour incomes experience a secular decline since 1980. 
A third and perhaps most critical ëstylized factí about income inequality is that the earnings of labour, broadly defined, as a share of world GDP has consistently been falling since 1980. This is one of the driving forces of greater income inequality across the globe, arguably the most fundamental one. The aggregate picture is captured in the Figure I. 3 below. 
In 1980 the total earnings for labour, including so-called ëmixed incomeí which captures income from self-employment and own-account work, amounted to around 62 per cent of world gross output, but by 2011 the  same had declined to 54 per cent. This decline of labour earnings at a global level is per definition mirrored in a concomitant increase of the earnings of capital income as a share of world GDP. 
    The determinants of this major shift in earnings in the global economy reflect a wide range of factors. Some of these are determined by policy responses in the context of open-economies, in particular wage compression in order to remain globally competitive and maintain or boost net export receipts. Another factor is the increased capital intensity of global production processes which command greater resources in order to finance fixed investment and the depreciation of capital goods. Yet another determinant is the increased profits and rates of return to investment globally. While the returns to labour are stagnating or decreasing, the returns to capital are increasing.
Part 2: Sustainability and inequality
    A pattern of world development that respects environmental limits imposed by tipping points in critical Earth system processes and achieves the socio-economic goal of eliminated poverty in its various dimensions is the overarching goal for sustainable development.
    Sustainability implies that a particular pattern of development can be sustained over a long period, without major disruptions.  It may apply at many levels ñ including households, communities, countries, regions and the world and across a wide range of resources and assets, including natural, human or physical. In popular discourse, sustainability continues to be associated with climate issues and global warming. But many other factors can disrupt developments and make them non-sustainable. This Survey focuses on all three dimensions:  economic sustainability ñ meaning the avoidance of major fluctuations and macro-economic crises; social sustainability, interpreted as generation of social cohesion and avoidance of conflict; and environmental sustainability interpreted as adopting a pattern of development which avoids dangerously rising carbon emissions, exhausting finite natural resources and breaching planetary boundaries. The Survey argues that reductions in inequality would contribute to all three types of sustainability and that a substantial reduction in inequality is needed to support stability of all three kinds. This implies far-reaching action at community, national, regional and global levels.  This Survey seeks to identify policies and programmes that would be helpful to move the world in the direction of a more equal income distributions, while acknowledging that profound and additional actions in other domains will need to be taken up in order to create an enabling environment towards achieving sustainable development for all. 
    When considering the relationships between inequality and environmental sustainability, both inequality between-countries as well as within counties are highly relevant. With regard to economic sustainability, inequality within countries is particularly relevant. However, where we consider political and social sustainability the notion of horizontal inequality (inter-group distribution within countries) is also particularly pertinent. This section discusses the three dimensions as well as complementarities between the three dimensions of sustainability.
Environmental sustainability and inequality
    An environmentally sustainable pattern of development is one that ensures that our current consumption and production behaviour does not restrict the opportunities open to future generations. There are many aspects of the environment which are or may be threatened by our present economic activities, ranging from the number of natural species in the world (bio-diversity), the fertility and productivity of the soil, the excessive use of non-bio-degradable materials, over-exploitation of ocean resources and so on, to unsustainable carbon emissions and resulting global warming which threatens many aspects of life, including ultimately life itself. Green-house gas (GHG) emissions and resulting global warming are a clear and imminent threat to so many aspects of human life.  Moreover, many of the same arguments apply to other environmental threats, like pollution and degrading of our habitats, which, like carbon emissions, tend to rise with increases in incomes.
    Environmental sustainability has been categorized into ëstrongí sustainability and ëweakí sustainability. Weak sustainability assumes substitutability between natural capital and manufactured capital. Weak sustainability can thus be assured by a sufficient savings rate to generate non-natural capital as a substitute for the natural capital that is depleted during development. Some substitutability is clearly possible:  for example, the amount of carbon emissions per unit of output can be reduced by investment in alternative types of energy such as solar energy or by investments in sequestration and other forms of de-carbonization.  As observed in the WESS 2013, while there is ësignificant scope for substitution in many areas, yet certain forms of natural capital including the ecological services they provide cannot be replaced by man-made capital. Their exploitation has thus to be limited so as to preserve the overall capacity of the ecosystems to provide those servicesí. (Ayres, 2007, Neumayer 2010). This Survey therefore focuses in particular on strong sustainability. 
    Interpreting sustainability in terms of carbon emissions, it is well established that sustainability requires tough limits on global total emissions of greenhouse gasses ñ a case of strong sustainability.  A major change from current trends is essential if we are to avoid highly dangerous global warming by the end of the 21st century (See Box I.1).
Inequality between countries
    There are robust reasons for concluding that there is a two-way relationship between inequality and carbon emissions: on the one hand, less inequality would be likely to contribute to reduced carbon emissions by reducing the catch-up imperative that underlies the overriding drive for economic growth within countries as well as between countries - indeed one can go further and argue that it is not likely that we could achieve a sustainable situation without a major reduction in inequality between countries. On the other hand, overwhelming evidence suggests that poorer people and poorer countries are worse affected by the consequences of climate change than richer people and countries.  Poor countries and poor people are worse affected for the following reasons:
* Countries more dependent on agriculture are likely to be worst affected. And within countries, small farmers are likely to be worse affected than large farmers and less able to adapt. There will be adverse effects in arid and semi-arid countries in Africa, which are among the poorest in the world.
* Food supplies are likely to be adversely affected, with lower growth and more fluctuations, leading to a rise in food prices and more volatility ñ each of which affects poor people worst as they spend more of their incomes on food. Food prices in nominal and real terms have sharply risen during the period 2001 to 2013. (FAO 2013). 
* Low-lying countries including especially small island countries will be worst affected by rises in sea-level ñ indeed for some their very existence is at stake.  Among the Ö small island economies, Ö are in the categorized as  least developed countries. There has already been a sharp increase in disasters affecting small islands (CDP, 2009). 
* Within countries, poorer people tend to live in areas likely to be affected by natural disasters (flood plains; hillsides etc.) Poorer countries and poorer people have less capacity to adapt because of their lower base in terms of human and financial resources.
* Measures taken to mitigate climate change or to protect a country against the effects of climate change often impose the largest burden on the poor, for example, rises in the price of fossil fuel, expenditure on which tends to form a larger proportion of income among poorer groups. 
    The IPCC concluded that ëcountries with high levels of income-inequality experience the effects of climate change more profoundly than more equal societies. ë ((IPPC 2007) 2007; chapter 4). One reason is that weak social cohesion (associated with high vertical and/or horizontal inequalities) reduces the quantity and quality of support systems, both from the state and by the community (See Chapter 2).
    The irony, which has often been pointed out, is that poor countries and poor people contribute minimally to the emissions that lead to global warming, but they suffer disproportionately from the effects. This irony has important implications: because it means that those most affected are least able to do anything about it, and those whose actions would make a huge difference have less incentive to take action because they can protect themselves from many of the adverse effects. They can turn up the air-conditioning in their cars and houses; they can move to less affected areas; they can increase their insurance against natural disasters.  And it is they, not the poor, who are benefitting from the profits generated by growth, from the extraction and sale of fossil fuels, from the new products, from travel by air and by car and so on.
    Some have argued that to achieve sustainable development will require limits to economic growth, perhaps even declining per capita income in the advanced economies. (See e.g. Raworth 2012).  This, of course, raises major political and economic issues, since the drive for continued economic growth is a near universal political objective, and achieving greater convergence and catch-up growth in developing countries - in the sense of reducing between-country inequality of per capita income - is imperative from a perspective of global fairness and social justice. Furthermore, continued economic growth is the de facto basis of global capitalism.
    Middle income countries, responsible currently for the major increase in emissions, are not likely to agree to any restraint in growth or, substantially, in emissions, so long as the rich countries continue to be so much richer and to be so much higher carbon emitters in per capita terms.  And poor countries have more pressing priorities than reducing their relatively small contribution to reducing emissions, including advancing the health, education and nutrition of their people (Neumayer 2010).
BOX I.1 Convergence and Climate Change
A baseline projection of population, GDP and emissions by 2050, using a number of standard assumptions on investment and technological change, indicates the nature of the challenge to limit emissions as well as to reduce inequality between countries. In accordance with standard models, long-term GDP growth trends are assumed to be driven by growth of (i) the working population; (ii) the average education levels, reflecting increases in human capital; (iii) the physical capital stock; and (iv) total factor productivity, reflecting technological progress. As with all long-term economic projections, the results are subject to many caveats. (PriceWaterhouseCooper, 2013).
First and foremost, the projections would support the view that the ërise of the Southí is bound to continue with China projected to overtake the US as the largest economy by 2017 (in terms of GDP measured in purchasing power parity dollars). By 2050 the size of Chinaís GDP would exceed that of the US by more than 40 per cent. Other emerging economies gaining in the size-ranking are expected to be Brazil, Mexico, Indonesia, Turkey, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia and Vietnam, while India and Russia would hold their ranking as respectively third and sixth largest economies. In addition to the US, other advanced economies expected to obtain a lower ranking but still remaining in the top-20 are Japan, Canada, South Korea, Argentina and EU member countries (Germany, France, United Kingdom, Italy and Spain). These results are broadly similar to those of a study prepared by Buiter and Rahbari for Citibank in 2011 which forecasts even more buoyant GDP growth up to 2050 (See Buiter and Rahbari, 2012). 
Second, the resulting between-country inequality in 2050 would still remain very high. The relative income levels per capita in China, as a proportion of those in the US would still be only about 44 percent, whereas the buoyant growth scenarios of Buiter and Rahbari estimate that China per capita GDP will be barely 50% of that of the US.  Such mean-income convergence contributes to declining global inequality, but it can easily go hand in hand with rising within-country inequality as this Survey has documented over the past three decades.
Third, with regard to energy use and climate change, the outcomes critically depend on whether a ëgradualí or a ëradicalí greening scenario would replace the ëbusiness as usualí scenario characterised by a slow rate of decarbonisation projected to 2050 based on the average of only 0.8% per annum (across all countries) during 2000-2011.  Hence the analysts warn that ëit may already be too lateí for the UNís Copenhagen target of limiting global mean temperature rise to under 2∞ Celsius above the pre-industrial level. The ëgradualí greening scenario would reduce energy intensity by an average of 1.4 per cent per annum, along with a greener fuel mix and investment in carbon capture and storage; this could reduce emissions by another 1.5 percent above the business-as-usual scenario but it would not be consistent with the 2∞ Celsius target; indeed, it is more likely to result in temperature rise in the vicinity of 4 degrees Celsius above the 1900 average.
The analyses of Nordhaus with the DICE-model at Yale University also project a global mean temperature increase of 3.5 degrees above the 1900 average; these results are corroborated by the IPCC as well as the Energy Modelling Forum at Stanford University (Nordhaus, 2013, p. 47). The analyses also investigate the cost of meeting global temperature targets. Two key results deserve emphasis. First, under optimal conditions of 100 percent participation of countries and efficient policy design, the costs to achieve the Copenhagen target would be a modest 1.5 per cent of world income. However, with limited participation of countries, the cost will rise exponentially; a 50 per cent participation would shift cost curves upward by a factor 2 (etc.). Second, the implementation of less-than-optimal policies (allowing exemptions for particular sectors and activities, incoherence of taxes and subsidies, etc.) would once again steeply increase the cost of abatement. Nordhaus also concludes that ëunless virtually all countries participate very soon, and do so in an efficient manner achieving the Copenhagen targets of limiting the increase in global temperature to 2 degrees Celsius is not possible with current or readily available technologies.í       
    Once greater convergence is achieved, we could assume a slowdown in growth in the regions that have caught up, as they confront the technological frontier, their labour surplus is exhausted, and population growth slows further.  With greater global convergence to the incomes and technologies of the rich countries, we might assume that technological change could reduce emissions radically, bringing the increase down to zero, and eventually decreasing global emissions.   As we shall argue below, sharing incomes more fairly within countries would also help eliminate the catch-up motive within countries (See Chapter 2 of this Survey on environmental sustainability and inequality).
    Another way of looking at this issue is in terms of justice. The notion of safe limits on emissions, leads to the conclusions that there is an absolute upper limit to the sustainable amount of carbon the world can emit.  A ëjustí solution would be to distribute this equally across countries. Equality in emissions per person should be defined in terms of carbon footprint or emissions profiles of each personís consumption, not production. This solution does not necessarily lead to equality of incomes across countries ñ arguably countries with more human and physical capital would be able to convert from emissions to incomes more efficiently than those with lower human and physical capital stocks. So one might reformulate the objective as equal per capita emission rights, with the resulting income distribution the consequence of conversion efficiencies. But against this, one would need to consider inequality of historic emissions, and the unequal starting points in terms of physical and human capital. Allowing for all these complexities, the resulting distribution of incomes across countries would be much more equal than the present distribution and it would be more just.
    It could do so by hugely greater restrictions on carbon emissions in rich countries than in the rest of the world, involving radical reductions in emissions in these countries, effectively redistributing emissions if not income. To date, this is broadly the intention (not satisfactorily realized) of current negotiations.  These negotiations and the prospects of satisfactory outcomes would be greatly eased if the need for global redistribution were accepted and if some substantial redistribution of incomes went along with redistribution of emissions. 
Inequality within countries
    Similar arguments apply to income inequality within countries, both with respect to the catch-up motive for growth and with respect to justice. Inequality within countries is a major reason why growth in incomes has to be an overriding goal in most countries, yet it also means that life satisfaction doesnít rise, or doesnít rise proportionately, with growth.
    Several factors account for the continued dominance of income growth as the major economic objective of rich and poor countries.  First, the drive of companies to find markets, combined with scientific discoveries and technological innovations, has led to the continuous development of new products with the result that people want higher incomes so to be able to consume the new products. Secondly, the desire to accumulate wealth remains very powerful even among those who have enough ñ nor have people found ways to occupy their leisure ëwisely and agreeably and wellí.  Indeed employment is wanted in itself, for the occupation of time it provides and for the dignity and respect it confers, not just for its monetary rewards.  But a third factor lies behind the importance of growth of incomes as a goal: this is the inequality in income distribution. Upper income groupsí consumption standards are not only higher than those of lower groups, but continuously improving, in many countries, currently, at a faster rate than standards of living of lower groups, especially in those countries where these  have been stagnating, including in several advanced high-income countries.  The growth in upper income groupsí consumption  provides the initial markets for the new products which eventually reach the mass markets; but by the time they do, the high-income earners have moved on to new products.  In so far as peopleís wellbeing is related to their position relative to others in society, continuous growth is needed even to keep in the same place.  At the same time, richer classes promote growth so that they can meet the demands of lower-income groups for rising incomes without having to countenance income redistributive measures.
    Research into ëhappinessí confirms this view. What has come to be known as the Easterlin paradox  states, on the basis of empirical evidence, that average happiness rates  in rich countries do not increase as aggregate national income grows, but within countries individualsí gain happiness with increases in incomes (Easterlin 1974). Complementing this finding, much research shows that a personís position relative to others is an important determinant of life satisfaction (Kingdon and Knight 2004, Knight and Gunatilaka 2011);(Graham and Felton 2006). In a situation of inequality, while aggregate incomes grow, peopleís relative position may not improve (and may worsen) consequently reducing (or eliminating) the impact of additional incomes on happiness.  Essentially, then, in the presence of inequality, people are continuously dissatisfied with their position  even when incomes riseññ because all (but those at the top) find they are lagging behind, and thus much of the rise in incomes (and the concomitant rise in emissions) is needed just to stay in the same place in terms of happiness. This is, of course, combined with continuous product innovation, and a system of marketing which constantly creates demands for the new products.
    If inequality were substantially reduced, much of the motive for additional incomes would be removed.  Moreover, non-income objectives, like standards of health and education, and social cohesion would be greatly improved since these are undermined by inequality ((Mayer 2000, Wilkinson and Pickett 2009, Cruces, Garcia Domench et al. 2011)).  In addition, non-income dimensions of human development are generally low in emission content: they include many non-material aspects such as good relationships, cohesive societies, low levels of violence, spiritual fulfillment and so on. 
    The reason poor countries want growth is to raise living standards above an unacceptable level.  Growth does generally contribute to poverty reduction even in the presence of inequality (Dollar and Kraay 2001) and evidence shows that measured happiness rates rise with rising incomes in middle income and poor countries (Graham 2009). But poverty reduction could be achieved much faster with redistribution. In fact most poor countries could eliminate poverty, as currently measured, by internal redistribution. And redistribution within middle income and poor countries would permit the achievement of human development objectives with much less growth ñ and emissions.  This is exemplified by countries with more equal distribution which have higher human development, as measured by the Human Development Index (see Chapters 3 and 4).
    The arguments above relate to strong sustainability. For weak sustainability (i.e. assuming some substitutability between physical and natural capital), sustainability also depends on the investment rate and its allocation.  There is little evidence to support the view that more equal income distribution leads to a lower investment rate (Alesina and Perotti 1996, Alesina and Perotti 1996). Even if the rich may save more than the poor, with more unequal distribution government spending may be skewed towards social services and cash transfers to the poor and away from investment. Moreover, it is not just a question of the investment rate, but its allocation to reducing carbon emissions ñ and here the growth imperative, partly motivated by inequality as argued above, is likely to mean that more unequal societies allocate a lower proportion of their investment to carbon saving. Evidence suggests that more equal societies devote more resources to controlling local pollutants, and this may also apply to policies towards emissions (Torras and Boyce 1998). Extinction of species and loss of biodiversity is associated with greater income inequality (See Chapter 2). 
    In conclusion, then, we have a vicious cycle:  inequality between and within countries makes it less likely that the world will stay within safe limits, either in terms of environmental limits, or human development imperatives.  And this in turn means that environmental sustainability will not be achieved, which will worsen inequalities.   Technically, it would be possible to identify an alternative economic system ñ the sort Keynes in 1931 envisaged for the grandchildren of his generation. But politically this is not likely.  
Economic sustainability and inequality
    Most evidence suggests that less inequality is associated with higher growth, although the finding is not totally robust and has been questioned (Alesina and Rodrik 1994). However, there seems to be much more robust evidence that lower inequality leads to greater sustainability of growth. ëWe find that longer growth spells are more robustly associated with equality in the income distributioní. (Berg and Ostry 2011): 4. The effect is large: reducing inequality by 10% is estimated to increase the length of a growth spell by 50% (Berg, Ostry et al. 2008). The impact is considerably higher than the estimated effect of having better political institutions, as well as a variety of economic variables including the level of external debt. (Berg and Ostry 2011) ñ see diagram.
    While Berg et al provide convincing evidence that inequality is associated with less durable growth, (Kumhof and Ranciere 2010) have developed a model explaining why this is so. They have shown how in the US a sharp increase in inequality preceded the crises of 1929 and of 2007-8. They argue that this arises because middle and low-income households borrow to maintain (or increase) consumption, with loans from the financial sector on the basis of the assets of the rich. But eventually, as the debt-to-income ratio of low and middle income households rises, it becomes unsustainable. Inability to service debts leads to a financial crash, and a halt to growth.  This argument has also been developed for the 2000s by Stiglitz for the US and by Lansley for the UK (Lansley 2011, Stiglitz 2013). 
    Stiglitz (2013) convincingly argues that the worsening inequality in terms of a declining wage share in GDP was a major element leading to the financial crisis which in turn resulted in the major global financial recession. The low and declining wage share (Figure I.3) meant that low and middle-income households could not afford to consume the goods the economy was able to generate.  In the US, this was not offset by an export surplus (as for example in Germany) ñ indeed there was a large import surplus for much of the time. Two types of deficit kept the economy going at near full capacity: first, government deficits sustained net demand, resulting in rising government debt and potentially undermining stability. The second source of additional demand was provided by consumer borrowing ñ partly for general consumption, but mainly to finance housing.  As is well known mortgages were given on increasingly generous terms, with little regard for the borrowersí ability to repay. 
    A similar argument applies to the global distribution of income. Poor countries often borrow from rich ones in order to support investments (and consumption), leading to an accumulation of debt which eventually becomes unsustainable and debt-fuelled growth comes to a halt.  The debt crisis of the 1980s is an example.
    While the argument that there is a link between inequality and rising debt is convincing for developed countries, with their abundant financial instruments, and also for countries which have access to international finance, it is less likely to apply to poor countries own macro-developments, given their weak financial sectors. Such countries are, of course, affected by fluctuations in developed countries with large downturns there causing commodity price falls, reductions in remittances, in foreign direct investment and financial flows and remittances (Stewart 2011, Martorano, Cornia et al. 2014). Yet there is also evidence of a link between inequality within poor countries and instability in these countries (Berg and Ostry 2011). This is probably due to different reasons than in advanced countries since the weak financial sectors of poor countries limit formal consumer debt. The link between inequality and instability in these countries may be related to low investment in human resources that tends to accompany high inequality, as low-income households limit their expenditure on education, health and food and this makes it more difficult to sustain growth. In line with this argument, (Ranis, Stewart et al. 2000) and (Suri, Boozer et al. 2011) found that countries which had poor human development either experienced low growth or, if they did have a growth spurt, were unable to sustain it over the period 1970 to 2008.
    A further possible connection is through political processes. High inequality may demand populist expenditures which can lead to lower growth (as less is spent on productive investments), and/or to unsustainable budget deficits. Further, high inequality may result in a lack of social cohesion and political instability, with growth-reducing effects. This will be considered further below in the section on social sustainability. 
    In summary, for both rich and poor countries, and for the global economy, it seems that higher inequality leads to greater macro-economic instability as rich countries/rich people lend to poor countries/poor people in order to sustain demand and political support and stability, but this eventually leads to unsustainable debt accumulation and severe economic recessions, recurrence of which cannot be ruled out.
Social sustainability and Inequality
    Social and political instability threatens wellbeing: when political instability leads to dissent and eventual violence it not only causes people physical harm (deaths and injuries) as well as mass migration, but also undermines the economy, makes it difficult (sometimes impossible) for people to produce or earn enough to sustain their families. These ill effects have been well documented (Stewart 2001, Collier and Bank 2003). 
    Much research has investigated the question of whether higher inequality leads to loss of social cohesion, ultimately resulting into violent conflict within countries.   There is strong and accumulating evidence that horizontal (or group) inequalities are associated with greater likelihood of the outbreak of civil war, on the basis of case studies and econometric investigations ((Gurr 1970, Stewart 2001), (Mancini 2005, Stewart 2008);(ÿstby 2003, Cederman, Weidmann et al. 2011)). In contrast, on balance the evidence does not support a connection between vertical inequality and civil unrest or war (Fearon and Laitin 2003, Collier and Hoeffler 2004), although ( Nafziger and others 1999) found a weak connection. However, high income inequality is more likely to be associated with high levels of criminality ((Bourguignon 2001) (Fajnzylber, Lederman et al. 2002)). 
    Horizontal inequalities (HIs) lead to loss of social cohesion because people often mobilize behind a common identity (frequently, ethnicity or religion) and such mobilization can be stimulated by sharp HIs. There is less potential for mobilization with high income inequality, but there are peasant and caste movements which unify and mobilize the deprived.  The inequalities then are a form of group inequality with the common identity that mobilizes people being based on class, caste, religion, ethnicity and other forms of social identity.
    Empirical analysis showing a correlation between horizontal inequalities includes the work of ÿstby who shows a significant rise in the probability of the onset of conflict across countries, for countries with severe social and economic HIs, for 1986-2003(ÿstby 2008).  In her models she defines groups alternatively by ethnicity, religion, and region and finds a significant relationship between HIs and the onset of violent conflict for each definition. Social HIs are measured by average years of education and economic HIs by average household assets. The effect of HIs is quite high: the probability of conflict increases threefold when comparing the expected conflict onset at mean values of all the explanatory variables to a situation where the extent of horizontal inequality of assets among ethnic groups is at the 95th percentile. 
    There are also intra-country studies showing a positive relationship between the level of HIs and the incidence (or intensity) of conflict. Mancini uses district-level data to examine the relationship between HIs and the incidence of conflict in districts in Indonesia (Mancini 2005). After controlling for a number of intervening factors including population size, ethnic diversity and economic development, he finds that horizontal inequality in child mortality rates and its change over time are positively (and significantly) associated with the occurrence of deadly ethno-communal violence. Results also suggest that violent conflict is more likely to occur in areas with relatively low levels of economic development and greater religious polarization. Standard measures of (vertical) income inequality as well as other purely demographic indicators of ethnic diversity are found to have no significant impact on the likelihood of communal violence.
    Research indicates that HIs are particularly likely to provoke conflict where there are both economic and political inequalities simultaneously in the same direction (Stewart 2008, Cederman et al 2011, Ostby 2008), since in those circumstances leaders have an incentive to mobilize, because of political exclusion while socio-economic inequalities provide an incentive for people to mobilize. There is also evidence that horizontal inequalities are associated with other forms of group violence, including milder types such as riots and horrendous forms like genocide ((Fein 1993) (Harff 2003), (Stewart 2013). Some work too links gender inequality to domestic violence (Yodanis 2004).  The relationship between HIs and conflict provides a strong motive for action to correct such inequalities, even among people who are not concerned with equity. 
    The discussion above has suggested that inequality can impede sustainability in three different ways:  
* With high inequality it will be (and is proving to be) extremely difficult to achieve a sufficient reduction in carbon emissions to prevent dangerous global warming.  Where there is major inequality between countries, this leads to a continued drive for growth, more or less irrespective of the carbon consequences.  Acceptance of tough carbon restrictions is unlikely without much more equality between countries and within them.  Reverse causality occurs here: inequality is worsened by the consequences of non-sustainable growth ñ the climatic and other hazards have been shown to affect poor nations and poor people worse than rich people and rich nations. Thus a vicious cycle ensues with more inequality leading to less sustainable strategies and this in turn resulting in rising inequality.
* Inequality within and between nations also contributes to instability of the macro-economy because it tends to lead to rising debt levels among poorer people and nations in their attempts to keep up with the standards of richer people and nations, and eventually the accumulation of debt becomes non- viable because of the rising debt service and this in turn results in a financial crash and instability in the macro-economy. Here there is no strong evidence of reverse causality.
* Loss of social cohesion and associated political and economic instability has also been shown to be correlated with inequality. Empirical evidence shows that the risk of civil unrest and war rises with horizontal inequalities, while political instability more generally (including coups, strikes) is associated with high vertical inequality. In some conflicts, horizontal inequalities get larger but in others they narrow, depending on the location of the conflict.
    Thus sustainability of all three types is likely to be enhanced by reduced inequality. But we also need to consider the impact of one type of sustainability on another.  Here there are complementarities as well as conflicts. One possible conflict between the three types of sustainability, is that the higher growth, which is likely to be associated with fewer and more moderate fluctuations in the macro-economy, may worsen the emission situation, unless accompanied by strong technological innovations and adaptation. Yet, social sustainability is likely to support macro-economic sustainability, and conversely. Furthermore, a context of socio-political stability and sustained growth may make it easier to impose carbon-restricting measures.
    For the most part, it seems likely that the complementarities between the three types of sustainability outweigh potential conflicts. Socio-political and economic stability is likely to provide a favourable policy-context for taking responsible environmental decisions. Where societies face strong divisions, they are likely to put less weight on global and national public goods, than where resources are more evenly distributed and tensions and conflicts are consequently less.  The ideal is a politically stable society with few economic fluctuations where people give significant weight to environmental objectives.  Such a society is likely to be one with much less inequality between people, groups or nations, than currently prevails.
Part 3: Drivers of inequality and Policy Frameworks to Reduce Inequality 
    It is noteworthy that the burgeoning literature on inequality has devoted very little space to analysing policy frameworks to reduce it. Yet across the world at different times, a considerable range of effective policies to bring about greater equality have been adopted.  A careful cataloguing and evaluation of these policies is needed and this Survey seeks to contribute to that.  
    Policy frameworks may include regulation to improve the primary (pre-tax) distribution as well as secondary (post-tax) distribution. Primary distribution can be made more equal by raising minimum wages and introducing restrictions on maximum pay, as well as by affirmative action to reduce group inequalities. These policies need to be supported by policies to achieve much more equal distribution of capital ñ human capital, through the education and health systems, and physical and financial capital through the redistribution of land and other assets.  Social capital should also be made more equal by providing opportunities for people to intermingle in terms of their housing location, their schooling and other facilities. 
    The fiscal system can potentially make a large contribution to improving secondary distribution ñ both by taxing the wealthy (on assets as well as incomes) and by subsidizing the poor (by cash transfers etc.). In addition, publically provided services ñ evenly distributed across the population in terms of quality as well as quantity ñ can make a major contribution to improving the distribution. (See Chapters 3 and 4). 
    In principle, democratic governments could be expected to support redistributive policies, since the majority of the population would gain from them. Yet typically this is not the case, for a variety of reasons. These include the influence of corporate interests in determining opinion and decisions (including by financing political parties); and because the middle income groups fear that redistribution would be at their expense and not at that of the rich (Wade 2014). 
    Global redistribution presents even more of a challenge because of the absence of a global government. In this situation, even though the vast majority of people in the world would gain from redistribution, the losers would have to agree with any policy framework with redistributive implications. Moreover, in the absence of an internationally agreed frameworks for taxation, migration and others flows and transfers, there are few mechanisms available. Market mechanisms are, to a limited extent, helpful: especially via migration and remittances and rising commodity prices. If global corporations, which account for at least a third of world trade, were properly taxed and part of these tax revenue would accrue to the countries where their value added is created, it could make a significant equalizing contribution. The difficulty is not to devise possible mechanisms, but to bring about the political economy conditions for their introduction.  One may hope that as climate change leads to new catastrophes, popular pressure for action may bring about a change in political conditions and coalitions.
    Although an agreed analytical framework for identifying drivers of inequality does not exist, the extensive research into inequality in its various forms makes it feasible to identify a number of factors which cause inequality. In any comprehensive policy framework towards the reduction of inequality, these factors need to be identified and recognised and their impact needs to be modified through policy reforms. For these drivers the mechanisms through which they may result in increased or sustained and persistent inequality are outlined, distinguishing effects through factor and product markets, as well as through regulation, legal enforcement, quotaís and the granting of privileges. Structural inequalities reflect the ownership distribution of a broad range of assets, and these structural inequalities are accentuated through the differences in returns and rewards on these assets accruing to different groups across society. The following sections provide a summary review of the ënewí literature on economic and social drivers of inequality, relating this to concentrate ownership of assets and related political influence, causing persistent and high income inequality.  
For these drivers the mechanisms distinguish effects through factor and product markets, as well as through regulation, legal enforcement, quotas and the granting of privileges. Structural inequalities reflect the ownership distribution of a broad range of assets, and these structural inequalities may be accentuated through the differences in returns and rewards on these assets accruing to different groups across society.
Economic inefficiencies and Inequality
It is widely acknowledged that taxation on top income and wealth segments are below optimal. With (capital) income and wealth accumulating among a shrinking share of the population in many developed countries and a low propensity to consume at the top, there are options to raise more revenue that could be used to consolidate fiscal balances and/or mitigate austerity and increase spending. As will be elaborated below (Chapter 3), such revenue could be raised by restoring the progressivity of taxation on labour and capital income as well as through taxes on wealth or financial transactions. One-off capital levies could be considered in countries facing high levels of debt. While these options are not to be recommended across the board, some of them would certainly deserve more consideration in relation to the difficult situation facing many countries in the aftermath of the euro-crisis (e.g. in Southern Europe).
Stiglitz (2012) in his examination of inequalityís effect on the economy, society and political institutions, with particular focuses on the US, identifies the ëprice of inequalityí in terms of its costs to economic efficiency, social cohesion, democratic policy making and political transparency. His examination of drivers of inequality focuses in particular on rent seeking, including ëmonopoly profits and excessive compensation of some CEOsí as a key driver of the making of an unequal society. An analysis of CEO compensation in the US undertaken by Bloomberg in 2013 reports that across the Standard & Poorís 500 Index of companies, the average multiple of CEO compensation to that of rank-and-file workers is 204, up 20 percent since 2009. Some 200 of the companies paid their CEOs a greater multiple and the top-ten companies paid as much as 1235 times the average pay including benefits of their employees, which itself was in the range from $24,913 to $86,033.
Stiglitz presents a multi-pronged reform agenda which would enable a reduction of inequality. The agenda would include economic and tax reforms as well as a major redirection of public expenditures.  The overall objectives of restoring and maintaining full employment will require, inter alia, accommodating fiscal and monetary and trade policies, active labour market policies and a public investment boost towards saving resources rather than saving labour.  While his discussion is specific to the United States, its applicability may be wider. The economic reform agenda would include seven key elements including (i) curbing the financial sector with regards to its excessive risk-taking, lack of transparency, abusive practices and predatory lending, short-termism and the promotion of tax evasion and avoidance; (ii) effectively enforce competition; (iii) improving corporate governance, including with regard to CEO pay and bonuses; (iv) better balanced bankruptcy laws; (v) end government giveaways through procurement and the disposition of assets at preferential rates; (vi) end hidden subsidies to corporations, through tax exemptions and loopholes, cheap credit and loan guarantees; and (vii) comprehensive legal reforms and improved access to justice. These economic reforms will need to be underpinned by tax reforms which yield a progressive income and corporate tax system as well as a more effective estate tax system. 
The public expenditure side of the reform strategy would focus on improving access to education, programmes to boost home-owners equity rather than debt, access to healthcare for all and strengthening other social protection programmes, such as unemployment insurance. Stiglitz contends that ì Ö social protection can make for a more productive society. Individuals can take on more high-return, high-risk activities if they know there is a safety net that will protect them if things donít work outÖî (p. xix). 
Incentives and productivity-enhancing asset redistribution
Theoretical and empirical work on addressing the structural inequalities through redistribution of assets goes back many centuries, for example to the writings of a leading protagonist of the Americaís independence Mr Thomas Paine. In short, the proposal of Paine was to endow each person reaching the ëage of majorityí with a certain financial sum (of ten pounds sterling) enabling ëhim or her to begin the Worldí and develop some wealth and escape from the vicious cycle of poverty. Paineís motivation for proposing this in his pamphlet on Agrarian Justice was to overcome the poverty resulting from peopleís alienation from agrarian land and could be considered as a payment for no longer having access to land as a common property. The proposal commensurately suggested that the funding for the scheme was to be raised through a ìground-rentî, in effect a tax on land ownership. (Paine 1797, 2008). Perhaps unsurprisingly, his radical proposals were never truly adopted and critics were quick to point out that the capability of people to generate a positive yield from such an endowment differed greatly. While some individuals and households would flourish, others would simply revert to poverty after a brief spell of time, reflecting individualís capabilities, efforts and commitments.
The Paine proposals find their counterparts in contemporary discussions for a ëbasic incomeí. Such proposals had first been mentioned by the humanist writer Thomas Moreís in his Utopia and have since been advocated in a great variety of contexts and with numerous different proposals for its coverage, funding and application. During 2015 Switzerland will vote in a referendum to grant an unconditional minimum basic income to all Swiss nationals. While protagonists focus on the issue of fairness, the opponents emphasize the need to achieve incentive compatibility, where income earned is based on the delivery of labour or professional services and ownership of physical, financial and intellectual property. 
Against this context, the ënew economicsí of inequality and redistribution has focused on the potential of productivity-enhancing effects of asset and wealth redistribution. Bowles et al., 2012 present a number of fundamental reasons why different systems of governance of economic assets can lead to greater efficiency in the use and allocation of these assets. According to this school of thought, asset and wealth redistribution can be a positive sum game and will not necessary imply that economic growth opportunities are jeopardized. 
The theoretical basis for such ëequality optimismí stems from the theory of incomplete contracts, which observes that enforcement of contracts may be very costly. In such cases, the resulting market outcomes may be second best, characterized by lower efficiency because a substantial share of the potential value added needs to be reserved for supervision, inspection, auditing, control, insurance and mediation of the behaviour of the contracting parties.
Examples frequently discussed in economic literature relate to the leasing and tenancy of land and property as well as employer-worker relationships in industrial organizations. In summary, the owner of the assets will be the residual claimant of the gross revenue earned from the use of the assets, such as land, real estate, machinery and financial capital. These revenues will depend on the efforts and due diligence which those working with the assets ñ tenants, workers and sub-contractors - have made during the operation of the assets. While the contract stipulates rights and responsibilities for all parties, the gains for the principal party, who ultimately claims the residual benefits and profits, will critically depend on the quality of work and effort which tenants, employees and sub-contractors have provided. In order to ensure the best effort of those operating the assets, the principal may need to engage in extensive and costly supervisory efforts. The economic theory of Principal-Agent relationship examines these propositions in greater detail and provides theoretical and empirical evidence of the scope for better outcomes, both in terms of equity and efficiency, drawing on the concepts of governance structures (such as private ownership) and coordination failures (where contracting parties do not achieve the best possible outcomes).
Bowles et al (2012: p9) focus on the reasons why inequality may be an impediment to implementing productivity-enhancing ownership structures. First and foremost, the incentive structures may be such that the behaviour ëcritical to high levels of productivity ñ hard work, maintenance of productive equipment, risk-taking, the production and use of knowledgeí cannot be monitored effectively. The alternative of a transfer or sale of ownership and the residual claims cannot be achieved because it is unlikely that the workers and operators, etc. have sufficient access credit markets, often in view of a lack of collateral wealth. Second, greater equality may enhance productivity if it does foster greater solidarity to facilitate co-operation and trust, necessary to reduce the risks entailed by the incomplete nature of the contracts. Third, the cost of monitoring compliance with the incomplete contracts implies extensive allocation of resources into supervision, auditing, property protection, security, insurance, etc. For these reasons, the authors argue that ëunder favourable institutional circumstances, policies to promote greater equality are not incompatible with rapid growth of productivityí. 
The economics of wealth inequality are particularly pronounced because of constrained access to credit-markets, which is predicated on owning a certain amount of wealth, to be pledged as collateral. Many potential borrowers are shut out altogether, or they face much more unfavourable terms. Potential borrowers facing such credit constraints will tend to borrow less than optimal. They will engage in projects which are less risky and shorter-term and hence yield less returns than they could have done without the constraints. Meanwhile other borrowers, owning greater wealth, may take up less productive projects because they are not facing a credit-constraint, while good high-yielding projects remain undone and are excluded because of the credit constraints. If asset-poor credit-constrained small entrepreneurs are the most efficient owner-operator of physical assets, such as land and machinery, or the most efficient provider of services (e.g. in retail or professional services) that would support the conclusion that asset redistribution could lead to greater efficiency and greater equity. Improved financial inclusion would also support greater efficiency as well as greater equality. Similarly, if the residual claims are shared between the asset owner and the employee through co-ownership, the incentives for providing a best effort will be enhanced, the cost of supervision of contract enforcement could be reduced and it would be easier to overcome credit constraints. Chapter 3 of this Survey presents a number of examples of successful cooperative enterprises in South Asia, based on the findings of Sobhan 2010. 
Institutional Determinants of Inequality
    Any analysis of drivers of inequality needs to take account of the institutional context in which these drivers are embedded. This is required to explain the different outcomes of the drivers of inequality in different (institutional) contexts. What may affect or reduce inequality in one particular country-context may not have the same impact in another, reflecting different historical, economic and social contexts.  
Moyo (2013) assesses the affirmative action and economic empowerment initiatives in Southern Africa, which provide a telling example how the institutional context in which these are implemented determines their outcomes and results. Affirmative action programmes intended to broaden the participation of ìindigenousî peoples in the ownership and benefit of the mining, industrial and service sections of the economy have been tried in South Africa and Zimbabwe as a means of reducing income and wealth inequalities. Their main focus has been to encourage, through various incentives or compel through withholding public tenders, the main large-scale enterprises to redistribute the ownership of their equity, and promote the allocation of procurement tenders to previously disadvantaged people, the majority of whom are black. These initiatives also seek to enforce employment quotas which reflect racial and gender demographics, while requiring firms to invest in skills development as well as in community development schemes. Generally, the mechanisms used to finance such asset transfers or compel equity transfers from large firms owned mainly by foreign capital have not been effective, although poor design and implementation might partly explain this unsatisfactory outcome. (See Moyo, 2013). 
In South Africa the expectation has been that redistribution would come through job-creation resulting from growth with limited public expenditure; this was found to be illusive (Ncube, Shimeles and Vardier-Chouchane, 2012). This led to the elaboration of the Broad Based Black Economic Empowerment Programme (BBBEE) to address inequalities and widen economic opportunities.  The most recognised result of the BBBEE so far is that it has enabled the growth of a black middle class and had led to blacks owning between about 4% of the capital on the JSE by 2008 (Ncube et al 2012), although alternative estimates put this at 10% of the JSE (Acemoglu et al, 2007). Numerous observers argue that BBBEE has ëmainly enriched the politically connected elite (Moyo, 2013, p. 47).  Despite the growing extent of black equity ownership, greater access to public tenders as well as enterprise development that has so far occurrred, these measures have not lowered aggregate personal income inequality levels in South Africa. Instead they have widened inequality in general among blacks and raised it. Moyo argues that this new black capitalism and the bureaucracy have in effect aligned with capital to protect such income inequality (Moyo, 2013, p. 47). However, this outcome is not a necessity and initiatives elsewhere have resulted in better result, reflecting a more favourable institutional context (Sobhan 2010).  
Acemoglu and Robinson (2012) note that the historical context of these programmes has been a systematic attempt at ëdualizationí of South Africaís economy which has been happening steadily since the 1913 Native Land Act. It forced indigenous farmers off their lands and into wage employment, forcefully creating a labour-surplus situation. The authors quote Francis Wilson (1972) who showed that following the said 1913 Act, minersí wages fell by 30 per cent between 1911 and 1921. Fifty years later, minersí wages were still 11 per cent below where they had been in 1911. They observe that it was ëno wonder that over this period South Africa became the most unequal country in the worldí  and ëeconomic institutions were extractiveí (Acemoglu and Robinson, p.268-270).  Today South Africaís challenge lies in ascertaining that its newly created institutions will change from being ëextractiveí to being ëinclusiveí. 
This Survey identifies ten separate drivers of inequality ñ their impact will play out differently in different historical, economic, social and ecological spaces. It is not argued in this Survey that the reduction of inequality will necessarily require policy interventions addressing all these drivers. Countries and regions facing persistent high and sustained inequality, such as countries in Southern Africa, will need to adopt bolder measures than others (e.g. in parts of Europe or Japan). This reflects not only the seriousness of the challenge, but also the fact that equalizing measures are already deeply entrenched in the policy orientation of societies with lesser inequality, for example through social protection and progressive taxation. Some of the drivers of inequality are largely determined by global and international processes, such as technological change or climate chance, while others are to a large extent determined by national decisions, such as macro-economic frameworks, or types of barriers to education and other public services or discriminatory practices which citizens face.  Some of the drivers of inequality play out at the micro-level of, for example, the household and within families. 
Challenges to tackle the rise of inequality
The adoption of policy framework which improve distribution and reduce inequality will require strong national ownership and effective and legitimate processes of representation and voice, including non-governmental stake holders and civil society forces. The lack of or weak representation and voice often becomes a driver of inequality, not allowing the controversial proposals which may help to reduce inequalities to go forward. This section seeks to show that the tide is turning in favour of those seeking to tackle inequality.  
Severe income disparity is perceived as number four out of a list of the ten global risks of highest concern in 2014, based on a survey of the perceptions of 700 leaders from business, government, academia and non-governmental and international organizations. (World Economic Forum, 2014, p.9 and p.56).  For a third year in a row, severe income disparity was perceived as a global risk most likely to occur. It was perceived to have a very high impact, although fiscal crises, climate change and extreme weather events, un- and under-employment were perceived to have an even greater impact. Furthermore, the 2014 WEF survey revealed that respondents see income disparity as closely connected and clustered in particular with un-and underemployment and political and social instability, as well as fiscal crisis and global governance failure. 
Asian policy makers are becoming more concerned about inequality. In an informal, web-based survey of Asian policy makers in JanuaryñFebruary 2012, over 65% of respondents agreed that income inequality in their countries was high or very high. Almost all felt that incomes in their countries were becoming more unequal. Moreover, a majority believed that success in reducing poverty was insufficient to justify widening inequality. This concern is increasingly being addressed through development plans across the region, as they include explicit goals to make growth more inclusive. In an informal web-based survey by the ADB it was found that 95 per cent of 504 senior policy makers surveyed across Asia indicated that they consider it ìimportantî or ìvery importantî to have a policy framework in place to prevent further rises in inequality.
The United Nations Development Programme commissioned a perception survey of inequality amongst a range of national policy makers, building on the earlier ADB initiative for Asia mentioned above. Senior policy makers in fifteen countries across five regions were interviewed, including 2 low, 6 lower middle and 7 upper middle income countries from Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Carribean, South-east Europe, Middle East and Central Asia. Income inequality, as measured by ëmarketí Ginis during the most recent decade, was rising in six countries, whereas it was falling for six others, in one there was no change and for two countries data were not available.  The respondents were Members of Government or Parliament, representatives of local and state-level bodies as well as senior civil servants.  The face-to-face interviews included questions about the (i) policy relevance: to what extent should inequality be a policy concern; (ii) policy options: what measures should be taken to address it; and (iii) policy space: what measures would be politically feasible? 
On policy relevance, the senior policy makers were asked to what extent they believed that ëcurrent levels and trends of inequality were compatible with the long-term development of their country?í. With regards to the level of income inequality 77 percent described this as either ësomewhatí or ëhighlyí problematic, with 17 percent taking a neutral stance. Only 7 percent considered the inequality level as ësomewhatí or ëhighlyí conducive. With regards to the trend of income inequality 70 percent perceived this problematic, 20 percent was neutral and 10 per cent judged this as conducive. The relevance of levels and trends of inequality of opportunities was also surveyed, with 70 per cent viewing the level as problematic and 65 percent viewing the trend as problematic. The report observes that policy makers perceive that inequality is not likely to be compatible with long-term development goals. Consequently nearly half of the policy makers consider reduction of the level of income inequality as a top-priority while six out of ten perceive reducing the level of inequality of opportunities as a top priority.
On policy options, the respondents were asked about the necessity of a dozen selected income-inequality reducing policy measures. In order of greatest necessity, policies to reduce tax evasion were ranked highest, followed by introduction or expansion of conditional cash transfers. Subsidies to key factors of production for SMEs and in the agricultural sector were ranked third and fourth. Introducing or increasing minimum wages, employment guarantee schemes and tax incentives to promote FDI in marginalized regions were fifth to seventh. Collective bargaining and increased progressivity of income taxation were eighth and ninth. Considered as least necessary were respectively asset redistribution (e.g. land reform), consumer subsidies on e.g. cooking fuel or food items and taxation on financial transactions. Less than half of the respondents considered the latter three policy measures as ënecessaryí or ëhighly necessaryí and there was relatively greater deviation of opinion, possibly indicating the polarizing nature of this kind of intervention. 
Finally, on policy space the political feasibility of the policy options was assessed. Respondents were asked to indicate how much political support they think there is for the selected policy measures. Unsurprisingly, the assessment of the feasibility of the various measures was considerably below the support for the various inequality reducing measures, indicating desirability and necessity. The feasibility of agricultural sector subsidies, conditional cash transfers and reducing tax evasion was judged highest. Corresponding with the lower perceived desirability, the measures increasing progressivity of income tax, asset redistribution  (e.g. land reform) as well as taxation on financial transactions were identified as having least support. On the whole policy makers are ëoften sceptical about the political feasibility of [most] inequality-reducing measures and generally do not see much space for action on inequality reductioní Several potential strategies for the creation of policy space are noted, amongst others  (i) promoting inequality reduction as a multi-stakeholder issues and (ii) seeking constructive engagement of the business community on the notion that the reduction of excessive inequality is a shared interest. 
              
The importance of action to tackle inequality was also underscored in the consultations on inequality in the framework of the post-2015 agenda. The consultations emphasized that inequalities have negative social, economic and political impacts and therefore affect societies at large (ìinequalities harm us allî). Unless inequalities are deliberately addressed, progress towards poverty eradication and sustainable development will slow down.†Focusing only on the symptoms of poverty or exclusion (i.e. lack of income, education or health), rather than on their structural causes, has often led to narrow, discretionary measures aimed at addressing short-term needs. Economic, socio-political and spatial inequalities can have cumulative, mutually-reinforcing effects that contribute to the systematic disadvantage of some social groups and to the intergenerational transmission of poverty. Putting the reduction of inequalities in the post-2015 agenda compass will realign the agenda with the fundamental values of the Millennium Declaration. The consultations also stressed the importance of holding governments accountable for fostering development that is inclusive, equitable and non-discriminatory. (Inequality Consultations Post-MDG 2013).
Some have argued that a self-standing global goal on inequalities should be included in the post-2015 development framework. In addition, others have argued that all goals should be framed in such a way that it would make their achievement conditional on progress in all segments of society. The World Bank has proposed and adopted a goal for the organization indicating that its delivery should be designed to benefit the lowest 40% of the income distribution. This is likely to reduce inequality, although it would of course depend on the precise changes in the other upper parts of the income distribution. 
In particular, Michael Doyle and Joseph Stiglitz have proposed that the elimination of extreme inequality at the national level in every country should be a ësustainable development goalí in and by itself. (Doyle and Stiglitz, Sept 4, 2013)  The targets set for the goal are twofold: first, that by 2030, extreme income inequalities in all countries should be reduced such that the post-tax income of the top 10% is no more than the post-transfer income of the bottom 40%; second that by 2020, a public commission is established in every country that will assess the effects of national inequalities.
 
They propose the use of the above mentioned Palma ratio, which measures the income share of top 10% of population divided by the income share of bottom 40% of population. The motivation for this choice of indicator is that a top-to-bottom ratio makes it intuitively clear how unequal any particular society is. In view of the importance of the top 1 % in the growth of extreme inequality, the use of the Palma ratio would help to improve the understanding of the issues. The Gini-coefficient ñ a single number describing an entire distribution ñ does not have this intuitive appeal, nor does it adequately capture the changes in the top or the bottom of any distribution. It is possible to approximate the Palma to the Gini using a particular dataset such as the World Bankís PovCal dataset and Cobham and Sumner indicate that ëa Palma ratio of 1 is consistent with a ëGini coefficient of around 28; a Palma of 2 with a Gini of around 41 and a Palma of 3 with a Gini of around 48. (Cobham and Sumner, 2013, p6)
This Survey identifies the following ten drivers of inequality as well as a set of policy frameworks which may be deployed to reduce inequality (Table I.1).     
* Unequal distribution of ownership of assets (physical, human and financial capital)
* Technological change
* Globalization/International trade and finance 	
* Macro-economic framework/ Fiscal policies and public expenditures
* Climate change, natural disasters and environmental sustainability
* Migration and labour market regimes
* Barriers to access to education, financial services and public services
* Discriminatory practices (age, race, gender, ethnicity, nationality religion, sexual orientation and other)
* Intra-household allocation of resources and responsibilities
* Lack of representation and voice

Chapter II: Inequality and environmental sustainability
Introduction
Reduction of socioeconomic inequality can be beneficial not only for economic and social development but for environmental sustainability, too. While much attention has been given to the relationship between equity and economic growth and between equity and social development, the relationship between equity and environmental sustainability has not attained a comparable prominence in major development reports. Yet, there is now considerable empirical evidence showing that equity can be beneficial for environmental sustainability. Many scholars have also produced theoretical formulations to help explain why this relationship holds so strongly. 
The present chapter examines the evidence and arguments for the ability of less socioeconomic inequality to help contribute to the achievement of environmental sustainability. First, it provides evidence for the correlation between inequality and environmental outcome across countries. The evidence encompasses loss of biodiversity, consumption of food and water, and generation of waste. 
The chapter then focuses on the mechanisms that may explain that observed correlation. In this regard, it identifies the following four channels through which inequality may influence environmental outcomes:  (a) individual, (b) community, (c) national and (d) international. Through the individual channel, inequality operates mostly on consumption-related behaviour:  For example, the rich generally pollute more simply because they consume more. Through the community channel, inequality exerts its negative influence on mobilization of the collective efforts necessary to protect common-property resources, which are often environmental resources. The chapter notes that this issue has become more important, in the light of climate change, because both adaptation and mitigation require collective efforts on the part of communities. 
Through the national channel, inequality impacts national decision-making. The rich, despite the fact that they always represent a very small group of people, can still often skew national decision-making towards their own interests, which may be more aligned with policies that are detrimental to environment. Furthermore, inequality may allow the rich to ìdumpî pollution on the poor, while insulating themselves by various means from the consequences of pollution. As a result, inequality may cause a society to have a higher aggregate level of pollution than that found in a more equal society. The chapter also examines whether the much-invoked concept of the environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) is helpful in understanding the observed negative correlation between inequality and environmental protection (see annex). It is noted first, that the concept has little empirical support and second, that even if the concept was deemed valid, it could not help to explain that observed correlations noted above and illustrated in detail below.
Inequality utilizes the international and national channels in similar ways.  The chapter observes that over time many global ìpublic goodsî are acquiring the characteristics of common-property resources, thereby making the mobilization of collective efforts to protect them more urgent and at the same time more difficult. Surveying the wide disparity across nations with regard to ìecological footprintî and greenhouse gas emissions, the chapter also observes that inequalities in terms of economic and political power at the international level are hampering mobilization of the collective effort necessary to reduce those emissions in particular and to protect the other environment in general. While the evidence considered in this chapter does reflect a recognition of the difficulties involved in addressing international inequality through deliberative policies, it also highlights the changes that are taking place as a result of the spontaneous upsurge of economic forces that should be harnessed to promote environmental sustainability through a binding agreement on emissions and climate change. 
Besides inequality in wealth and income, there are other dimensions of inequality with their own independent effect on environmental outcomes. Prominent among them is gender inequality.  As drawn from the literature on common-property resources, the evidence presented here shows that a greater presence of women in community decision-making bodies results in better protection of common-property resources. The chapter therefore advocates reduction of gender inequality as an important step towards achieving environmental sustainability.
Evidence of the relationship between inequality and environment
Researchers have currently amassed a considerable body of convincing evidence regarding the clear-cut negative correlation between income inequality and environmental protection. One environmental outcome that has been investigated in the context of inequality is loss of biodiversity, which may be one of the most important very long term impacts of economic inequality.
Inequality and biodiversity loss
Recent evidence demonstrates that greater inequality is associated with greater loss of biodiversity. Analysis of data both across countries and across the States of the United States of America shows strong evidence of a negative association being sustained between inequality and the protection of biodiversity (Mikkelson, Gonzalez and Peterson (2007); Holland, Peterson and Gonzalez (2009)). The relationship, which has been studied both at the aggregate level and at the level of individual species, is found to be consistent even with different sample sizes (see box II.1 for details). Figure II.1 depicts the scatter of the Gini ratio and the proportion of species threatened. That general positive relationship exists between the two is clear from the scatter pattern. The analysis of Holland, Peterson and Gonzalez also demonstrates the relative importance of inequality vis-‡-vis other factors in explaining variation in biodiversity loss. The outcome of this analysis is presented in figure II.2, where the proportion of variation in the percentage of species threatened is explained by different factors. As can be seen, inequality ranks second in importance. 
Inequality and consumption and waste generation
A similar negative correlation may be derived from studies focused on the relationship between inequality and many other dimensions of environmental outcome. For example, Dorling and other researchers examined the relationship between inequality, personal consumption and the generation of waste across affluent countries (see Dorling, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c; Dorling, Barford and Wheeler, 2007.) Their findings show that affluent countries with higher inequality consume more resources per person and generate more waste per person. Figure II.3, II.4, and II.5 illustrate the relationship between inequality and per capita consumption of water, per capita consumption of fish and meat, and per capita generation of municipal waste, respectively. In these figures, inequality is measured as the ratio of the income of the top 10 per cent of a countryís population to the income of the bottom 10 per cent. In each case, it was found that a higher level of inequality is generally associated with greater resource consumption and generation of more waste across the population as a whole (but especially by the rich). 
We see an increase in per capita consumption of water from 3.2 cubic metres in Japan, where the ratio of the income of the top 10 per cent of the population is 4.5 times greater than that of the bottom 10 per cent, to 6.8 cubic metres in the United States, where the ratio is 15.9 (figure II.3). Similarly, while Japanís per capita annual consumption of fish and meat is limited to 43.9 kilograms, in New Zealand, where the inequality ratio is 12.5, the per capita annual consumption of fish and meat is 130.1 kilograms (figure II. 4). 
The situation is similar with regard to waste generation. For example, in Sweden, where the inequality ratio is 6.2, annual waste generated per capita is 20.5 kilograms. However, waste generation increases to 370.6 kilograms in Switzerland, where the inequality ratio is 9, and to 164.5 kilograms in Singapore where the inequality ratio is 17.7 (figure II.5). Lower income inequality in affluent countries appears to lead to overall population behaviour characterized by greater care taken to consume less and hence discard and waste less, all other things being equal. There are exceptions, however: waste generation tends to be greater for island populations and water consumption is less in colder climes. Still, the strong relationship between excessive consumption and inequality stands out despite such exceptions.
The evidence thus shows a strong negative correlation between inequality and environmental outcomes. Examples can be drawn from many different areas of environmental concern: levels of many different forms of pollution appear to be higher, per person, in those countries with higher levels of economic inequality. The question then becomes, Does this correlation constitute a causal relationship, and if it does, then how can that relationship be explained. In other words, what are the mechanisms and channels through which inequality exerts its negative influence on environment? Understanding of these channels and mechanisms can help in the formulation of necessary policies.
Four channels for the influence of inequality on environment
Researchers generally believe that it is causation that underlines the observed correlation between inequality and environmental protection. For example, Holland, Peterson and Gonzalez (2009) conclude from their analysis that a causative factor is at play. In their view, there are many mechanisms through which causality may operate, which they classify as either individual or collective effects. The former are those changes in the incentives and behavior of individuals brought about by increased inequality. The latter are the changes in collective behavior and incentives that are mediated through environmental management institutions. As noted above, four channelsóindividual, community, national and internationalócan be identified through which inequality may exert its negative influence on environmental outcome (figure II. 5)
While the four-channel framework is a useful analytical construct for understanding the mechanisms through which inequality exerts a negative influence on environment, some further elaboration is necessary. 
  First, a distinction needs to be made between the individual and the household since, intra-household variations in consumption and waste generation may indeed be important in certain contexts. Sen (1990), among others, has highlighted gender disparity in consumption within households. However, we choose to ignore this issue in our discussion, mainly in order to keep things simple, but also because intra-household variations in consumption may not be particularly important from the perspective of environmental impact. Nevertheless, it is worth remembering that gender inequalities tend to be lower in more economically equitable countries, which may be important in the context of reducing overall polluting behaviour.
  Second, it may be noted that an essential distinction needs to be made between the individual channel, on the one hand, and the remaining channels, on the other. This distinction is based on the fact that while an individual can act by him- or herself, the effects exerted through the other channels call for collective action. An individual household in a more economically unequal country may choose to purchase a second or third car in mimicry of the behaviour of others in that country, or it may be forced to do so because public transport services are poor in situations of greater economic inequality. 
  Third, the channels are not separate and watertight.  Indeed, as shown in figure II.6, there is considerable overlap and interaction among them. Thus, some of the effects of a reduction of inequality may work through multiple channels and become reinforced. For example, certain processes that are macro in nature (and hence operate through the national channel) may exert an influence on individual behaviour too. Similarly, there may be some commonality among the factors that can either hinder or promote the collective action necessary for protection of environment at the community, national and international levels. On the other hand, there is also specificity in the operation of these factors at different levels, as discussed below.
Fourth, while attention is here focused on the influence of inequality on the environment, causality may also run in the reverse direction (as shown in figure II.6). For example, depletion of forests and open-capture fish stocks may decrease the resource base of the poor, thereby reducing their real income and thus aggravating inequality. In an environment where resources have been depleted, a minority of the affluent may be able to secure monopoly profits through their control of most of the resources that remain.  Evidence of this feedback effect can thus strengthen the argument for reduction of inequality in order to protect the environment. 
The individual channel of influence of inequality on environment
An important means by which inequality may affect environmental sustainability is through its influence on individual behaviour. It is well known from the literature on the ecological footprint that the per capita ecological footprint of rich countries is much larger than poorer countries. The main basis for this relationship is the fact that people in rich countries consume on average more than the people in low-income ones. What is not yet well known is that ecological footprints in more equitable countries tend to be much smaller than those in more inequitable countries enjoying similar levels of affluence. Thus, the ecological footprint of citizens in Japanóone of the most equitable of affluent nationsóis roughly half that of the citizens of the United States, which is one of the most inequitable. A similar relationship can be observed between inequality and per capita greenhouse gas emissions: countries with less inequality tend to have a lower level of per capita greenhouse gas emissions than those with similar per capita incomes but higher inequality.
A similar relationship between large ecological footprints and unequal income levels also exists within countries. A recent study of Canadian households, which examined the total ecological footprint of households belonging to different deciles of the income distribution, confirms this relationship (see Mackenzie, Messinger and Smith (2008)). The study found that the richest 10 per cent of Canadian households have an ecological footprint of 12.4 hectares per capita, a figure 66 per cent higher than the national average of 7.5 hectares (figure II.7). The ecological footprint of the richest 10 per cent is about 2.5 times greater than that of the poorest 10 per cent. The sources of the components of the ecological footprint are various sectors, namely (a) food, (b) housing, (c) mobility, (d) goods and (e) services. Examining those sources, the study found that most of the difference in ecological footprint between deciles is due to to differences in terms of mobility (travel). With respect to mobility, the footprint of the richest 10 per cent is 9 times higher than that of the poorest 10 per cent, compared with figures of 3.75 for goods, 2.7 for services and 2.25 for housing. It is with respect only to food that the difference in ecological footprint across different income groups is not quite so pronounced. 
The differences in ecological footprint across income categories are likely to be more pronounced in developing countries, where the consumption of the rich often differs from that of the poor not only in magnitude but also in kind. As the rich of developing countries generally emulate the consumption pattern observed in developed countries, their consumption basket generally includes more components damaging to the environmentósuch as various non-biodegradable materials, than does the consumption basket of the poor. Significantly, in rich countries, it is actually the affluent who often use most of the ìeconomyî air flights; in general, the poor do not fly, are least likely to drive long distances and, in general, consume the least fuel and pollute the least per person. Indeed, it is erroneous to assume that a transfer of income from the rich to the poor would increase consumption and pollution overall, since poorer people tend to use extra moneys for necessities. Richer people, on the other hand, are more likely to spend extra monies on yet another holiday, or still more travel.
It has sometimes been pointed out that poverty may lead people to engage in environmentally destructive behaviours. For example, they may resort to cutting down trees in open-access forests in order to meet their energy needs or fill up open-access water bodies in order to increase the amount of land they can cultivate. To the extent that such practices are prevalent, any increase in the income of the poor resulting from reduction of inequality will have a directly beneficial effect on environment by reducing the necessity for engaging in those environmentally damaging practices. However, others have maintained that it is not appropriate to blame the poor for such practices. In their view, it is generally the rich who cut down forests, fill up wetlands and engage in other such activities in order to promote their consumer and business interests. At the same time it is the rich who have the greatest opportunities to choose wisely and act responsibly.
The evidence and arguments presented above suggest that a more equal distribution of economic resources within each country might help protect the environment, to the extent that it reduced the consumption of the rich and lessened the need for the poor to engage (if and when that was indeed the case) in environmentally harmful behavior.  However, this may not be so simple to achieve in practice, with the outcome depending on several factors (see box II.2 for details). First, consumption claims a smaller part of the income of the rich than that of the poor. Hence, the reduction of the income of the rich may not affect their consumption by so very much, unless that reduction is drastic. Second, the increased income of the poor, resulting from the reduction of inequality, is expected to increase their consumption and hence their ecological footprint. In fact, since the marginal propensity to consume is greater for the poor, the consumption effect of an increase in income may be greater in their case. Therefore, any possible decrease in the ecological footprint of the rich resulting from a reduction of inequality may be partly offset by an increase in the ecological footprint of the poor. However, the proportion of the income of the rich that is not spent on direct consumption is generally saved and then invested; hence, the activity generated by those investments also needs to be taken into account in a fuller model. The net effect on the total ecological footprint may then depend on the relative size of changes in income and the relationship between income and consumption of the rich and the poor. All that can be said in general is that per capita consumption and pollution are known to be far lower in more economically equitable nations than in more economically unequal nations enjoying a similar level of overall affluence.
Because the above description of the forces at play derives from a simple focus on individual household behaviours, it offers a rather narrow view of the totality of impacts on consumption of the reduction of inequality. As noted earlier, the influences of inequality on environment are not channeled through watertight tunnels. Reduction of inequality will have other effects, including changes in national policies and ideology. Some of these changes may effect a shift in the consumption patterns of both the rich and the poor towards the production of a smaller ecological footprint, thereby reducing the overall ecological footprint of the society. To explore the possibility of these broader outcomes, it is necessary to consider the community and national channels of influence of inequality on environment.
The community channel of inequalityís influence on environment
  Through its influence on community behavior, reduction of inequality can help significantly to promote environmental sustainability. In particular, reduction of inequality may be conducive to the collective efforts necessary for the protection of the environmental resources that are owned or controlled by communities. In more-unequal countries, it is individualistic behaviour that tends to be promoted, which often results in a higher overall ecological footprint for all members of society, as compared with what often occurs in the context of a more collective approach not only to the provision of transport, but also to the construction of buildings (for example, are apartment blocks more common or do less well insulated, free-standing, detached houses preponderate?). Furthermore, where there is greater urban sprawl, pollution per person tends to be higher, whereas in more equitable countries, which tend to favour compact urbanization, urban sprawl is usually more restricted.
Inequality and common property resource (CPR) management
In the economics literature, proceeding from the concepts of ìrivalryî and ìexcludability,î goods and services have been classified within a framework of four categories, namely (a) private goods, (b) club goods, (c) common-property resources, and (d) public goods (table II.1). Inequality can affect the volume, distribution and use of all of them. However, precisely how inequality does so, and how those effects may be modified in order to protect the environment, depend on the category of goods. It is easy to see that many environmental resources fall within either the category of the common-property resources or that of public goods. While the role of inequality in protecting those environmental resources that are public goods has garnered more attention in recent years, its role in protecting environmental resources that are within the common-property resource category has been of long duration. 
An important consideration with regard to common-property resources is overexploitation. Hardin (1968) dramatized this possibility by coining the expression ìtragedy of the commonsî and using it as the title of his paper. The problem is that, with access to a common-property resource, each individual has the incentive to extract and/or use as much of it as possible, while disregarding the fact that emulation of such behaviour by others will lead to exhaustion of that resource. Initially, many perceived the solution to this problem as lying in privatization of the common-property resources and such a policy was actively pursued in the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s, especially in the more economically unequal countries. 
However, much more recently, other researchers have shown that many communities found other efficient ways of managing common-property resources, so as to prevent their overuse (see, for example, Ostrom and others (1999)). Several elements that have been found to be helpful in successful management of common-property resources are (a) definable boundaries of the resource, (b) a high degree of dependence on the resource, with no readily available substitutes, so that its exhaustion would pose a significant threat to the welfare of the co-sharers, (c) presence of a small but stable community characterized by a dense social network and social norms and (d) the existence of community-based rules and procedures with built-in incentives for following those rules and punishments for violation. It is not difficult to see that the homogeneity of a community and the density of its social network depend to a large extent on the degree of equality among its members. 
Unfortunately, the problem is not a simple matter of ìcollective goodî versus ìindividualistic badî. If it were, then the relationship between economic inequality and high pollution would probably have been recognized much earlier. It has been also been hypothesized that in certain situations, inequality may actually be helpful in protecting common-property resources (Olson, 1965). This hypothesis is a corollary of the general proposition that collective action is difficult when the collective is large, with the possible benefit to be derived by for each individual from the collective action being small and the scope for free riding being large. By contrast, collective action is more likely to materialize in a collective of small size, because the individual benefit is likely to be large and the scope for free-riding small. Thus, should it be the case that only a few members of the community can reap the bulk of the benefit from protection of the common-property resources, they may nevertheless act to the protect said resource even if the other memebers (who reap only a small part of the benefit) do not share the cost of protection. They may do so because the benefit reaped will exceed the cost of protection borne by them. 
The validity of this proposition regarding the beneficial effect of higher inequality on protection of common-property resources has been challenged on both theoretical and empirical grounds. The bulk of the research on this issue published to date has shown that equality is more conducive to the collective effort necessary for protection of common-property environmental resources. It may well be the legacy of the high levels of pollution generated through the rapid industrialization of what was largely communist Eastern Europe, and also the initially very rapid increase in pollution from the collectively planned industrialization of so much of China which has led to widespread confusion regarding when collective planning can be beneficial. 
Inequality, community effort and climate change
The role of collective effort in the protection of the environment has now become more important in the context of climate change. Successful mitigation and adaptation efforts require cooperation at the global, national, subnational, and community levels. The cooperative effort is particularly vital for communities that live at the frontier of the impact of climate change. 
For example, as many islands and low-lying countries are becoming partly submerged, the people living in these areas have either to migrate or to put up a resistance to the processes and/or adapt to the new situation those processes have created. While migration can be an individual response, resistance and adaptation require collective effort. In the many areas where climate change is drying up water bodies which are crucial for the survival of local communities, collective efforts to resist and/or adapt are also necessary. Further, experience shows that orderly migration requires collective action by both the migrants themselves and the host population at the location to which they are moving. Thus, by facilitating collective efforts, reduction of inequality can help communities confront and cope with climate change. 
In contrast, inequality can prove to be a hindrance not only to the collective efforts necessary for protection of local environmental resources, but also to the collective efforts required for protection of national and global environmental resources, as discussed below. 
The national channel of influence of inequality on environment
While efforts at individual and community levels are important for environmental sustainability, efforts at the national level are even more important. On the one hand, policies at the national level can not only influence what happens at the individual and community levels, but also determine what happens globally, since it is national Governments that collaborate to determine international policies and bear the responsibility of implementing them in their respective countries. How does inequality affect national environment policies?
It is generally believed that, when choosing from different policy options, a society picks the one that maximizes the net benefit of the members of the society. In such a decision-making framework, the preferences of all the citizens of a country receive equal weight. Researchers, however, have pointed out that such a perception is highly simplistic and naive. In reality, the preference of the rich holds more weight in the social decision-making process. Boyce (1994; 2007) has formalized this fact within the framework of what he calls the Power-weighted social decision rule (PWSDR) (see box II.3) 
If the rich prefer pro-environment policies, and the benefits of environmentally degrading activities accrue mainly to the poor, then, clearly, under the power-weighted social decision rule the possibility of those policies being adopted increases. Unfortunately, it is often the case that the rich benefit more from environmentally damaging policies, and in two waysóthrough consumption and production. To the extent that environmentally damaging policies lead to an increase in consumption, the rich benefit more, because they reap more of a consumer surplus (as discussed above). Further, it is also the rich who generally, invest, and own the producer surplus (profit). To the extent that environmentally damaging policies increase profit, the rich benefit more from those policies. Thus, on both counts, the material interests of the rich are often aligned with policies that are damaging to the environment. This alignment becomes stronger if the rich can insulate themselves from the effects of pollution and environmental degradation. They can do so in two ways: the first, by ìdumpingî pollution on the poor, and second, by insulating themselves from the impact of pollution through various means (see box II.3). It is clear that under the above scenario, the aggregate level of resource consumption and pollution will be higher than it would be in a more equal society, where it would be difficult to carry out such dumping and where the benefits and effects and costs of pollution would be more equally distributed. 
By and large, research supports the above arguments. For example, Boyce (2007) demonstrates that many of the hazardous waste dumps and other environment-damaging sites in the United States are indeed located in neighbourhoods inhabited by the poor, people of colour and immigrants. Dorling (2010b) provides similar evidence from the United Kingdom. Having conducted a study of more than 10,000 wards, he found that those having a higher proportion of households living in poverty were also experiencing a higher degree of nitrogen oxide (NOx) pollution (figure II.8). The fact that a higher degree of inequality creates the possibility of dumping pollution on the poor has led to the call for ìenvironmental justice.î The fact that inequality conduces to environmentally damaging policies and a higher level of aggregate pollution may therefore explain the evidence of the relationship between inequality and environmental quality which was presented above. 
As already noted, national policies designed to reduce inequality (through redistributive taxation, for example, in the case of communitiesóto be discussed in chap. IV) can exert influence at several levels. They can influence individual behavior; and facilitate collective efforts of the community members. Reduction of inequality can also in turn lead to more environment-friendly macropolicies. Recent research has shown that sustainable development requires sustainable consumption patterns. One of the important ways in which reduction of inequality may help is through facilitation of the adoption of such national macro policies directed towards promotion of sustainable consumption at all levels of society, including the levels of the rich and the poor. National policies are also important in fostering the global effort to protect the global environment. 
The international channel of influence of inequality on environment
One sign that the world is changing is that public good resources are often being turned into common-property resources. In other words, even if these resources remain non-excludable, they are no longer non-rivalrous. The current status of the atmosphereówhich used to be a classic example of a public good, because it was both non-excludable and non-rivalrousóoffers a prominent example of this change. However, now that safe limits on carbon concentration are being breached, the atmosphere is no longer non-rivalrous, because the carbon emissions of one country leave less space for allowable carbon emissions by others, a situation that only aggravates the breach. 
The situation is similar with respect to the oceans, another classic example of what used to be deemed a public good resource. The fact that the oceans are becoming common-property resources (instead of remaining global public goods) is due, for one thing the rise in atmospheric carbon concentrations, which is causing increased acidification of the oceans and an increase in their temperature. This has led to the expansion of the volume of water, the rise in sea level and the submergence of low-lying islands and countries (see Nordhaus, 2013, pp. 100-115). As a result, the oceans are no longer non-rivalrous. 
The shift in the classification of oceans from the category of public goods to that of common-property resources is also evident in the context of fish stock. The extent of the oceansí fish stock once used to be so large compared with the annual volume extracted (caught) by humans that it was essentially a non-rivalrous good. However, the fact that, over time, the volume of the fish caught by humans increased to such high levels that it now exceeds the replenishment capacity of the oceans, has resulted in the dwindling of the oceansí fish stock in many fishing areas. As a result, fishing activities of one nation now leave a smaller volume of stocks for fishing by other nations. Thus, issues concerning the role of inequality in obstructing the collective action necessary for protection of common-property resources have all become pertinent ones within the international arena. 
It is well known from the literature on the ecological footprint that rich countries have a much larger per capita ecological footprint than poorer countries have (figure II.9). As noted above, the main factor underlying this disparity is the difference in consumption levels. The people in rich countries consume, on average, much more than the people in poorer countries. Also, in recent decades, the increase in the per capita ecological footprint in developed countries has been several times greater than that in developing countries. Furthermore, as noted earlier, the content of the consumption basket in rich countries is often more damaging to the environment than the content of the basket in low- income countries. For example, there is a greater presence of non-biodegradable plastic materials in the consumption basket of rich countries. 
While the ecological footprint constitutes a comprehensive measure of the environmental impact of human activities, its accuracy has been questioned (Toye, 2013). Disparity across countries with regard to environmental impact is apparent from other measures, too. The most prominent measure in this regard is greenhouse gas emissions, which is a better accepted, relatively accurate measure. Although greenhouse gas emissions may be considered an only partial indicator of environmental impact, their consequenceónamely climate changeóhas the potential to destabilize the entire ecosystem of the Earth and put nothing less than all of human civilization at grave risk. From that point of view, greenhouse gas emissions are a no less important measure of environmental impact than the ecological footprint. 
Figures II.10 and II.11 illustrates the dramatic differences across countries with regard to current greenhouse gas emissions. On a per capita basis, the emissions of developing countries constitute only a fraction of the emissions of developed countries. The disparity becomes sharper when historical contributions to cumulative greenhouse gas emissions are factored in. While developed countries have been emitting large volumes of greenhouse gases since the first industrial revolution, in the late eighteenth century, the emissions of the newly industrializing developing countries are of recent origin. As a consequence, the developing countries are suffering and are expected to continue to suffer even more from the consequences of climate change, particularly the small island developing States and other low-lying developing countries. Unfortunately, these counties wield little power in the international arena. 
In validation of the power-weighted social decision rule, the unequal international power situation is proving to be a serious obstacle to mobilization of the collective effort necessary to confront climate change. In fact, the problems created by inequality (with regard to responsibility for causing climate change, suffering inflicted by its consequences, and capacity for mitigation and adaptation) are proving so insurmountable that progress in the process of implementation of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change has slowed down to a dramatic degree. To advance progress again, and to begin to better mitigate the drivers of climate change, might well require confronting the mechanisms through which high economic inequality reduces our capacity to adapt. It is possible that the bulk of the opposition to the measures needed to confront climate changes is coming from people supported by affluent individuals in the most economically unequal of rich nations; rich nations, however, often appear to be reluctant to see those who pollute the most (their citizens) act first and fastest.
Reducing inequality across nations, however, is a much more challenging task than reducing inequality within a nation or within a community. Hence, facilitating the protection of the global environment through reduction of international inequality can seem a distinctly quixotic goal. Quixotic or not, it entails a highly ambitious agendaóone calling for the international community to do nothing less than to design the international institutions tasked with confronting global environmental challenges in such a way as to lessen the influence of inequality on those institutions. Indeed, the egalitarian ìone country, one voteî principle of decision-making has been adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. However, such a step does not eliminate the problem of inequality inasmuch as the decisions arrived at in such egalitarian forums and mechanisms can easily go unimplemented by powerful nations if they do not own and support those decisions wholeheartedly, as has happened under the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Thus, a solution to the difficult problem of establishing collective efforts at the international level to meet global environmental challenges remains elusive.
At the same time, it is instructive to note that the conditions of international inequality are changing, if not through deliberate policies, then as a result of the spontaneous upsurge of economic forces. For example, over the last several decades, many countries of the developing world have become much larger economies. Their greater economic strength is now translating into a greater political role, as attested by the formation of the Group of Twenty (G20).  The challenge is how to harness and utilize these changes for protection of the global environment.
Gender inequality and environment
Income and wealth inequalities are not the only facets of inequality that affect environmental outcomes. Gender inequality, in particular, plays an important role in impending protection of environment. It is not difficult to realize that gender inequality often works in combination with other dimensions of inequality; for example, high gender inequality generally reinforces rising income and wealth inequality. However, there are dimensions of gender inequality that extend beyond income and wealth inequality, which often prove important for environmental sustainability.
The role of gender inequality has been discussed particularly in the context of collective efforts necessary for managing common-property resources. Agarwal (2007), for example, provides detailed information about how gender inequality affects collective efforts to protect forests under the rubric of common and public property in India. She provides evidence on the basis not only of extensive qualitative analysis but also of quantitative analysis. She examines, for example, the multiple correlations between ìforest qualityî and a host explanatory variables, including WEC (women in the executive committee), which signifies the proportion of members of the executive committee of the local community forest group (CFG) who are women. Agarwal finds that, given the values of other variables, the higher this proportion, the better the quality of forests. She believes that the observed positive effect of womenís participation on the protection of forests can be further enhanced by ensuring their greater and more effective participation in community forest group activities and decision-making, an argument amplified in Agarwal (2010).
The beneficial impact of reduction of gender inequality is not limited to protection of environmental resources under common property: that impact has a much broader scope. As already noted, gender inequality is often the manifestation of an unequal power situation rooted in the unequal distribution of income and wealth, and fostered by tradition and norms. Thus, synergy may exist among efforts directed towards the reduction of income inequality and gender inequality, a synergy that may be used to promote achievement of the goal of environmental sustainability through different channels. 
The establishment of the Brundtland Commission, of which the then Prime Minster of Norway, Gro Harlem Brundtland, was appointed Chair in 1983; the rise of many green political parties, which today have taken the lean in ensuring that they are headed by a greater proportion of women compared with all other political parties; the near absolute dominance of men holding positions of power within the global oil industries that are the most polluting; the awarding of the Nobel Prize to women researchers in the field of economics; the highly gendered inequalities in the areas of advocacy and current policy innovationóthe broad range of evidence offered by such developments has made it impossible to ignore the gender dimensions of the debate on environmental inequality.
Conclusion
This chapter has examined the evidence of and arguments for the urgent need to reduce economic inequality, especially where it is highest, so as to promote increased environmental sustainability. While much has recently been said about how the reduction of inequality can promote economic growth and social development, less attention has been paid to the relationship between equity and environmental sustainability. Yet, over time, there has developed a considerable literature, encompassing both empirical evidence and theoretical constructs, which argues that reduction of economic inequality can help to ensure environmental sustainability, and may potentially have a very significant effect on mitigating future climate change, given the very different levels of consumption and pollution in very similarly affluent nations.
Investigations show that reduction of inequality can have beneficial consequences for protection of the environment through four interconnected channelsónamely individual, community, national and international. Reduction of inequality exerts its influence through the individual channel mainly by fostering changes in consumption behaviour that may arise from a more equitable distribution of income. Through the community channel, equality works to facilitate the collective effort necessary for protection of common-property resources. At the national level, reduction of inequality may create a more level playing field conducive to the adoption of more pro-environment policies. At the international level, it is evident that unequal distribution of economic and political power is obstructing mobilization of the effort needed to confront global environmental problems, including climate change. 
The different channels through which inequality exerts its influence on environment are not separate and watertight, however. Instead, they overlap and interact. Often, such interaction can result in a reinforcement of the beneficial impact of reduction of inequality on environmental outcomes. 
Gender inequality, in addition to inequality in income and wealth distribution, is an important factor impeding protection of environment. Just as gender inequality is often intertwined with inequality in income and wealth (women are almost always worse paid), there is scope for synergy in efforts directed at reduction of income and wealth inequality and gender inequality. An important task will therefore be to make use of this synergy in order to ensure environmental sustainability.
The policy-related conclusion that emerges from the discussion in this chapter is clear. Reduction of inequality needs to be included in the sustainable development agenda. In this regard, it is encouraging that in discussions on the sustainable development goals, attention is being paid to the issue of inequality. It would also be helpful if some of the worldís climate scientists and other experts with an interest in and good understanding of the subject of pollution would examine the existing evidence economic equality decreases pollution and incorporate that evidence into climate change models, with a view to estimating the extent to which the adverse effects of climate change might be reduced if more countries started to become more economically equal.
As promotion of sustainable production and consumption constitutes a vital link between reduction of inequality and environmental sustainability, it is encouraging to note that the United Nations Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals has identified sustainable consumption and production as one of its focus areas in the context of formulation of the sustainable development goals. This issue was also emphasized in World Economic and Social Survey 2013 (United Nations, 2013). The initiative of promoting the transition towards sustainable consumption and production needs to be crafted by the developed nations. Of particular note in this regard is the growing spatial separation between production and consumption at the global level. For example, developed countries have shifted most of their labour, natural resources and pollution-intensive production operations to developing countries. As a result, they are able to enjoy unsustainable consumption without bearing the brunt of the local impact of pollution and resource exhaustion. Reduction of inequality both within and across countries can mitigate the adverse effect of spatial separation between production and consumption and promote sustainable consumption and production in the world as a whole.
At the national level, the primary responsibility for reduction of inequality belongs to the government, and chapters III and IV of this Survey examine concrete policies aimed at reducing inequality. Economic equality may create the political environment conducive to the adoption of national policies that are more focused on protection of the natural environment. National policies can be helpful for promotion of equality within communities, too (for example, through asset redistribution, as discussed in chap. IV). With more equality, it may become easier for communities to undertake the collective efforts necessary for protection of community-owned and -managed environmental resources. 
The hoped-for reduction of inequality at the international level through deliberative policies will be difficult to achieve. Much will depend on whether the international community can design global institutions in such a way as to mitigate the harmful effects of inequality on global decision-making. However, even if decisions are made on an egalitarian basis, their implementation will remain a problem without the requisite commitment of powerful nations. On the other hand, the international situation is changing owing to the spontaneous upsurge of economic forces. The ìrise of the Southî is one manifestation of such change. An important task will therefore be to harness these forces and put them to work on behalf of environmental sustainability. Specific policy suggestions in this regard will be discussed in chapter V.
 It is possible that as our understanding of the harmful effects of inequality continues to grow, even some of the richest players in some of the most inequitably affluent nations will come to realize that they need to give more serious consideration to their actions. As so many studies are being devoted to inequality and the environment-related behaviour of the most affluent, hopefully, the light shed by their observation and analysis will have an impact on those playersóand consequently on economic inequality itself. 

Chapter III: Employment and reducing inequality
Introduction
The present chapter focuses on employment, including on own account, because this constitutes the largest source of income for people globally. People work to earn an income, which enables them to acquire goods and services produced by the work of others. People also work in activities that do not generate an income, e.g., production of goods and services within the household, as these are necessary for material and social reproduction. On the whole, the opportunity to work, and to be thereby recognized as contributing productively to society, is vital for human dignity, self-esteem and well-being. 
    Yet, for the past two hundred years, the economic literature has focused mainly on output produced rather than on work and employment. The rationale has been that in order for adults eager to work to be fully employed, primary attention should be given to economic growth.
    For the past thirty years, however, employment growth has increasingly faltered relative to economic growth. In addition, financial globalization, deregulation of labour markets and austerity policies have reduced the share of labour income in total value added and have served to diminish the importance of employment policies designed to reduce inequalities by boosting internal demand. Notably, employment growth has been increasingly underpinned by more insecure jobs in many countries, e.g., temporary work without formal contracts and social security, as is mainly reflected by high levels of underemployment in developing countries and two-digit unemployment figures in some developed countries. Globally, the necessary switch to a sustainable development path further multiplies the challenge of creating employment that can benefit people and the environment simultaneously.
    Yet, challenges also opportunities for the adoption of policies designed to strengthen the quality and quantity of employment growth. An integrated and coordinated investment effort, public and private, focusing on providing decent jobs for the under- and unemployed, is needed. Structural transformation encompassing the shift from a carbon-based to a renewables-based economy can be fuelled by policies that focus on productive investment aimed at spurring the creation of decent employment by supporting social investment, which can reduce inequalities and enhance sustainable development.
    The chapter begins with a description of key employment trends and their linkage to inequality, and this regard traces the rise of vulnerable employment and unemployment and their adverse impact in both developed and developing economies. It emphasizes that the reduction of vulnerable employment can help to curb inequalities by raising incomes and boosting effective demand. Relevant gaps in social development and disaster risk-proof infrastructures, which provide additional space for employment-centred investment to reduce inequalities are identified. The chapter proposes a strategic integrated framework with a long-term focus on employment, which would entail macroeconomic policies that combine measures to reduce inequality of opportunities in labour markets, including effective support for minimum (living) wages, with investment in social security and social services, while also providing incentives for environment-friendly economic activities. 
    In accordance with the premise that the purpose of all socioeconomic activities is the pursuit of human well-being, sustainable development can be understood as consisting in a pluridimensional and mutually nurturing relationship between environmental protection and economic and social development. In this regard, economic development of strategic sectors and the pace of economic growth should be directed towards creating decent employment and protecting the environment. 
    Hence, economic growth can be sustainable only if: (a) it fosters social development by investing in social services and social protection and creating decent employment and (b) its reproduction protects and enriches the environment instead of being detrimental to it. 
    Finally, opportunities for, and the remaining impediments to, achieving sustainable development are examined in the course of an overview of countriesí employment strategies and policies aimed at reducing inequalities.
Main trends in employment
The present section focuses on salient employment trends and the nature of their linkages with economic growth, social reproduction, income inequality, social protection and social investment.
    Employment growth has remained sluggish and increasingly diverged from economic growth from the early 1990s onward. Figure III.1 reveals that while the world GDP average growth rate (in PPP terms) was over 3 per cent during the period 1991-2007, employment growth was quite stable at about half that rate during 1991-2007 but fell during the 2008-2009 recession and after. World Development Report 2013 (World Bank, 2013) notes that the responsiveness of employment to economic growth has not been strong since the early 1980s, reflecting a reduced capacity of economies to generate employment for a given level of economic growth. Some contributors to the literature have coined the terms ìjobless growthî and ìjobless recoveryî (Verma, 2012; Knotek, 2007; International Labour Organization, 2014).
    At the same time, the erosion of the quality of employment, e.g., income level and working conditions, has increased inequalities in labour markets and societies. In many developing countries, and more recently in developed countries, employment growth has increasingly been of a casual nature, under non-formal contracts and unsafe conditions of work (Ghosh, 2010). Global Employment Trends 2013 (International Labour Organization, 2013a) reports that, globally, the number of people in vulnerable employment totalled about 1.55 billion in 2012, higher than the number of people adequately employed (1.38 billion), and which included an increase of about 400 million during the great recession of 2008-2009  (see box III.1 for a definition of vulnerable employment). Kapsos and Bourmpoula (2013) observe that about 1.5 billion people, representing about 50 per cent of total global employment and residing mainly in sub-Saharan and South Asian countries, earn less than US $4 dollars per day.
Box III.1: What is ìvulnerable employmentî
Vulnerable employment is measured as the sum of own-account workers and contributing family workers (International Labour Organization, 2011). Own-account workers or the self-employed derive their income from operating their own farms, businesses or trades without employing any paid worker on a continuous basis. Contributing family workers, also known as unpaid family workers, are usually women and youth who work without pay or wages on a farm or in a business or trade operated by a related person living in the same household.
    Own-account work or unpaid family work often entails inadequate earnings, low productivity and the absence of social benefits such as pensions, unemployment insurance, sick pay, annual leave pay, parental leave, childrenís allowances and health insurance. The sizeable proportion of vulnerable workers in developing countries is typically associated with low wages, a large agricultural sector and inadequate growth of employment in the (modern) formal economy. Vulnerable workers, to avoid becoming unemployed, often take up various forms of insecure employment, work under unsafe conditions and are less likely to be represented by workersí organizations. In the event of non-payment of wages, compulsory overtime and layoffs without notice or compensation, workers engage in vulnerable employment do not have access to any social protection schemes which can shelter them from economic or environmental risk. 
    Vulnerable employment defined by statusóthat of own-account or unpaid family workeródoes not encompass all the situations of distress on the labour market. Those belonging to the category of temporary casual wage workersóe.g., casual labourers receiving a daily wage in urban and rural areas in poor countriesócan be among the most vulnerable workers. Informal and casual wage work in conditions of precariousness and vulnerability can also be found in formally registered enterprises where the majority of employees have formal contract arrangements. There is much overlap between informal and vulnerable employment. Overall, informal employment comprises one half to three quarters of all non-agricultural employment in developing countries and is often characterized by inadequate employment conditions associated with poverty and inequality.
    On the other hand, formal employment does not necessarily mean that workers earn decent wages and have adequate working conditions. Workers employed by bottom-end suppliers of global value chains may have income below a given poverty line. In fact, the literature on the so-called working poor refers mainly to people whose income falls below a given poverty line, and who work irregular schedules in several jobs and can be employed as much in formal organizations as in informal ones (Brady, Fullerton and Cross, 2010). 
    For the purposes of this study, country data on own-account and unpaid family workers estimated by the International Labour Organization (ILO) (2011) are mainly used as a proxy to  illustrate the magnitude of the number of people working in insecure jobs and under precarious conditions. A few caveats apply to the application of the concept of vulnerable employment. For one thing, not all workers in conditions of precariousness are included. Moreover, there are differences in definitions and coverage across countries and over time, resulting from variations in information sources and methodologies. Still, empirically, a high proportion of countries with a high share of vulnerable employment and high inequality tend to be low-income and lower middle income countries, while high-income countries often have a low share of vulnerable employment and low levels of income inequality (see figure III.7).
END BOX
Falling wage shares and higher inequalities
In many developing and developed countries, the sharp fall of wage shares over the past three decades has been part of a trend towards higher inequality (see figures III.2 and III.3). Notably, the shift of the functional distribution of income in favour of capital income combined with the concomitant fall in wage shares has been one of the main drivers behind sluggish employment growth and the erosion of working conditions. In Asia, real wages grew much below productivity after the crises of 1997-1998, which shifted the functional income distribution against labour incomes while also depressing effective demand. In China, labour policies contributed to keeping wages low and reduced the labour share in total income from 56.5 to 36.7 per cent between 1983 and 2005, while minimum wages declined as a share of average wages (Cornia, 2014).
    Podkaminer (2013) points out that the decline of wage shares in developing countries had already started in the late 1960s. In Latin America, labour-market liberalization during the 1980s and 1990s eroded real minimum wages and increased overall income inequality. In countries of Eastern and Central Europe, the fall in the ratio of minimum to average wage was correlated with higher earnings inequality (International Labour Organization, 2013b). 
    Some economists argue that the decline in wage shares has been mainly due to the  vast supply of low-skill labour in many developing countries and the increased competition and technological change arising from globalization. Although these might have been contributing factors, financial globalization and the higher profit share of the financial sector have also played significant roles (Ghosh, 2010). For instance, it is estimated that private dividends paid in France in 2012 represented 45 days of wage work, 3.5 times more than in 1981 (Piketty, 2013). In this regard, the study by Stockhammer (2013) based on a panel analysis for 1970-2007 of 71 countriesó28 developed and 43 developing countries (including emergent economies)óindicates that financial globalization has been the main cause of the decline in wage shares in both groups of countries. Openness to trade and investment has also had negative effects on income distribution.  More importantly, welfare-state retrenchment in advanced economies has had negative effects on wage shares. 
    Technological change is represented by gross domestic product  (GDP) per worker and the relative contribution of agriculture and industry to GDP.  It is shown to have had only had a modest and less-than-robust effect on the wage share: positive during 1990s for all countries, but negative for the advanced countries during the period from 1980-1984 to 2000-2004. These findings refute: (a) the generally accepted view that changes in income distribution in developed countries are mainly driven by technological change and (b) the Stolper-Samuelson theorem according to which globalization would benefit workers in developing countries (see figures III.2, III.3 and III.4).
Erosion of the quality of employment
Historically, the trends in respect of vulnerable employment for developing and developed countries have differed. Vulnerable employment has been a key feature of labour markets in developing countries for the past 60 years. In fact, the number of people in vulnerable employment has typically been several times higher than the number of the unemployed, and has been growing steadily (see figure III.5). In 2012, the average unemployment rate was 5.5 per cent in developing countries, while the share of vulnerable employment in total employment was 56 per cent. Thus, although the rate of vulnerable employment has slowed slightly and the rate of formal employment has risen since the late 1990s, vulnerable employment remains a major component of employment creation in developing countries (United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, 2010).  In practice, vulnerable employment still predominates in developing countries that have a two-digit unemployment rate. Moyo (2013) states that in the case of South Africa, both high unemployment and underemployment are key causes of income inequality, indicating that small reductions of unemployment in low-skill occupations in recent years did not increase formal employment but led instead to a swelling of the ranks of the informally employed. On the other hand, although the World Bank (2013) has paid due attention to the adverse effects of the great recession on (formal) employment and earnings, the sheer magnitude of vulnerable employment in many developing countries means that economic shocks can in fact worsenórather than createóemployment insecurity for people who already have low quality jobs.
    Weak economic growth is a cause for concern in the context of persistent unemployment and sluggish employment growth in developed countries. Yet, the quality of employment being created has also been inadequate, although sufficient attention has yet to be focused on this trend in those countries. Insecure jobs can also undermine effective demand because they often imply low wages, low productivity and inadequate social security. In fact, although the number of unemployed people in developed countries has risen following the great recession, for the past 20 years, the number of persons in vulnerable employment has been higher than the number of the unemployed (see figure III.6). In fact, in 2012, the average rate of unemployment in developed countries was 8.6 per cent, while the share of vulnerable employment in total employment was 10 per cent. 
    The likelihood that the category of own-account workers in high- and upper middle income countries includes professionals such as consultants, independent contractors and self-employed professionals like doctors and lawyers may signify that the actual proportion of people in vulnerable employment is smaller than the figures indicate. This would strengthen the argument that lower shares of vulnerable employment are concentrated in richer countries, while higher shares of vulnerable employment are concentrated in low- and lower middle income countries.
    Although data-related shortcomings reduce the possibilities for assessing the employment situation in low- and lower middle income countries,  the presence of a large and growing urban informal economy indicates the proliferation of casual and vulnerable employment, with the quality of employment being further eroded relative to upper middle income countries. In Kenya, for example, 80 per cent of non-agricultural employment is found in the informal economy (International Labour Organization, 2013c). In LomÈ, Bamako, Dakar, Lima and Ho Chi Minh City, informal employment represents 83, 82, 80, 59 and 53 per cent of non-agricultural employment, respectively (Herrera and others, 2012).
    Indeed, there is an ever growing number of people across the world, including both native and migrant workers, who live and work in insecure conditions, often take a series of short-term jobs, and are without recourse to stable employment, social protection and other labour regulations. Standing (2011), refers to these people, more broadly, as constituting the ìprecarialî.
    In a context of weak economic prospects, people depending on casual and vulnerable employment face higher risks of economic insecurity and even absolute poverty. If the success of economic development models can be judged by their ability to ensure good and stable employment, then failure has been the main outcome in the past two decadesóresulting in what ILO (2013a) refers to as a ìdeep job crisisî.
Is womenís vulnerable employment supporting social reproduction?
Globally, although the number of men working in vulnerable employment is higher than the number of women, the proportion of women working in vulnerable employment has been typically higher than that of men. In 2012, 51 per cent of women were in vulnerable employment relative to 48 per cent of men, with their numbers rising rapidly in developing countries (International Labour Organization, 2013a). Moreover, Heintz (2013a) argues that in many countries women do the bulk of part-time work and unpaid care work. In many cities of developing countries where informal employment predominates, womenís share is higher than menís, with women often working in service activities, e.g., in hotels, the retail trade and restaurants and earning the lowest wages (Herrera and others, 2012). In South Africa, black female-headed households constitute 92 per cent of households without income from work, highlighting the gender and racial elements of income inequality (Moyo, 2013). In countries that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the average wage of men in full-time work has been about 15 per cent higher than that of women.
    The rise in labour-force participation of women since the early 1970s has increasingly laid bare a gap in investment in social reproduction in many countries across the world. In developing countries, grandmothers (but also grandfathers) have, typically, often played the role of parents. Grandparents, who commonly receive either no public pension whatsoever or one that is insubstantial, have played a fundamental role as caretakers of children. While their assumption of this role is not a new social phenomenon, the increasing reliance on their unpaid labour exposes the inadequacy of social protection systems in developing countries. Since the second half of the twentieth century in particular, urban families with enough resources (i.e., the rich and the middle class) have largely relied on the regular flow of migrant women from rural to urban areas, to fill the gap in social reproduction. 
    In some developed countries, the rise in the number of women working outside the home has been supported by a welfare system that has financed the hiring of native women as caretakers of older persons. However, the restructuring of welfare systems in Europe and the United States of America, evident since the late 1980s, has prompted families to rely increasingly on the informal and semi-formal hiring not only of immigrant women, but also of immigrant men as well (Prieto-CarrÛn, 2010). Increasingly, waves of women and men from developing countries have been migrating to cities in developed countries, where they work for years before seeing their own families again, during which time family members, including grandparents, have taken care of their children in the country of origin. Thus, it is the vulnerable employment of immigrants and the unpaid labour of family members that have been the backbone support for social reproduction in higher-income countries (Julca, 2011, 2012a). Understandably, when men migrate or older persons are widowed, the burden of the unpaid work underpinning social reproduction and social protection falls upon women (United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, 2010). 
The links between vulnerable employment and inequality
Figure III.7 depicts the following stylized facts:
       (a) The majority of high-income countries combine low levels of vulnerable                 employment with low inequality (virtuous quadrant);
       (b) Though low labour vulnerability can be associated with both low and high income inequality, a high share of vulnerable employment is almost certainly associated with high inequality (e.g., very few countries are located in the south-east quadrant);
       (c) The majority of upper middle income countries can be associated with high inequality;
       (d) Those countries with a high vulnerable labour share and high inequality are mainly low-income and lower middle income (north-east quadrant);  
      (e) A necessary, but not sufficient, condition for reducing inequality appears to be reduction of the vulnerable employment share.

    These stylized facts attest that the higher income level of a country, including the likelihood of structural change, is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for generating a combination of low inequality and low vulnerable employment. Further, the reduction of vulnerable employment through provision, for example, of social security is a necessary step towards ensuring lower inequality, but not a sufficient one.  Lower inequality, on the other hand, greatly increases the likelihood of low vulnerable employment, which may indicate that redistributive policies and investment, for example, in social services are linked to the creation of more secure employment. In fact, high-income countries that are found in the virtuous quadrant, e.g., Northern European countries, have well-developed income redistribution systems which improve labour-market management and outcomes, including labour mobility. The measures adopted by them include institution of higher wages, training, social security, social protection and access to affordable and sound social services, e.g., public transportation. Box III.4 offers a summary of policies that could reduce inequalities and create productive employment in a sustainable manner.
    The fact that vulnerable employment is determined at the individual level and the Gini coefficient at the household level would mean that a household with multiple earners would be better situated than one with a single earner, regardless of the precariousness of employment. However, employment that includes the provision of social security would reduce vulnerable employment and strengthen the base of the income pyramid by favouring both households with single and those with multiple earners. Figure III.7 does indicate that the proportion of the vulnerable employed and the inequality level in each country serve as good proxies when it comes to identifying their levels of average income per capita  as well as their commitment to and capacities for investing in social security (see also figure III.8). 
    The fact that many of the high-income and upper middle income countries have a low share of vulnerable employment indicates that policies devised to support the creation of secure productive employment might go hand in hand with: (a) economic growth and (b) policies designed to improve labour-market conditions, including living wages (e.g., wages above the poverty line), training, unemployment insurance, and various social benefits. These policies should also repose on long-term investment in health care and education so as to improve productivity, which can support tax revenues and sustainable development, including a low fertility rate and an enhanced quality of consumption. Chapter IV elaborates on the taxation structures and redistributive policies that can support decent employment. 
    UNRISD (2010) indicates that low-income countries tend to have high inequality. In fact, countries that have a high share of vulnerable employment and high inequality, mainly low-income and lower middle income ones, are characterized by job insecurity and inadequate working conditions combined with low wages and casual income, all of which sharpen inequalities in these countries. 
Decoupling of employment creation and social protection?
In low-income and lower middle income countries in particular, formal employment creation has been minimal and social protection and security systemsóencompassing, inter alia, families, children, unemployment, work training, illness, old age, disability and vacation daysóare seldom in place. In these countries, the frequent dependence of members of the adult population on precarious sources of income, together with their lack of social protection, increases their risk of falling into extreme poverty in the event of income shocks (Esser and others, 2009). Figure III.8 complements figure III.7 by evidencing another stylized fact namely, that countries with sustained investment in social protection (and social services) (high-income countries) have likely reduced their share of vulnerable employment and inequality, while countries that have not been able to do so (low-income and lower middle income), have a high share of vulnerable employment and high inequality. The consistency of this logic is also valid for upper middle income countries. 
    In middle-income countries that have experienced sustained economic growth with some creation of formal employment in the last 10 years and where social protection mechanisms have long been in operation, the levels of investment in social security, coverage, quality and compliance vary (International Labour Organization, 2010). Figure III.8 indicates that on average, middle-income countries have invested more in social security than low-income countries but less than high-income countries. Overall, significant gaps exist between: (a) people who can and people who cannot afford to pay private social insurance, (b) people who work in rural areas and people who work in urban areas and (c) workers in the formal sector and workers in the informal sector.  
    Although many high-income countries still provide wide social protection coverage, slow growth and the implementation of deregulation policies in some of them, including the reduction of expenditure on social welfare, have led to a higher number of people with temporary jobs and no social benefits (International Labour Organization, 2010). For instance, some of the Nordic countries have restructured health and pension spending, limiting benefits to contributors (Kokko, 2010). Similarly, as a result of the economic impacts of the great recession of 2008-2009, other developed countries, such as Canada, Germany and Japan, have also reduced unemployment insurance contributions (International Labour Organization, 2010).
    Inequalities between countries, however, are not reflected only in differences in the level of vulnerable employment and provision of social security. More specifically, access of people to public services also varies significantly between countries, with the majority of countries that ensure adequate access to these services tending to have lower levels of inequalities and vulnerable employment than those that do not ensure such access. The subject of social investment gaps between countries is elaborated below.
Can social investment gaps become opportunities for employment creation?
Inequalities within countries and between rich and poor countries with respect, inter alia, to infant mortality, access to water and sanitation, and public investment in education and health, reflect asymmetric access to opportunities for human development. In general, underinvestment in infrastructure, as well as costliness and low quality of social services, underlies the inadequate access to basic social services in poor countries, which prevents them from experiencing better prospects for development.
    While many developing countries have been able to reduce the gaps in their provision of social services relative to developed countries, the pace of the least developed among them has been slower. There are few possibilities open to them to catch-up with the other developing countries, much less with the developed countries. This trend has been significantly sharper with respect to such indicators such as access to improved water sources and sanitation and reduction of infant mortality (United Nations, 2013).
    Along the same lines, World Economic and Social Survey 2009 (United Nations, 2009), emphasizes that developing countries face a higher risk from natural disasters than do developed countries, owing to several factors, including inadequate investment in risk reduction mechanisms, including early warning systems and adaptation technologies. Overall, poor people and poor countries have weak resilience to extreme temperatures, erratic weather patterns, and more frequent, more intense and longer-lasting natural hazards, such as storms, droughts, floods and earthquakes. The cost is high in terms of adverse effects on livelihoods, injury and loss of human life, and homelessness (United Nations, 2009; Julca, 2012b).
     Proposed in the next section is a strategic framework for employment-centred development, including policies designed to enable long-term investment in social services and social protection so as to improve sustainable development outcomes in developing and developed countries.
An integrated employment-centered framework for sustainable development
Within the integrated employment-centered framework for sustainable development, employment is both the driver of development and a source of economic security. In this context, the quality of employment is considered to matter as much as its quantity. Under the framework, employment in the twenty-first century would have to be integrated into a sustainable development paradigm for the more effective reduction of inequalities. This would make environmental sustainability as important as economic and social development. The three pillars of sustainable developmentósocial development, economic development and environmental protectionówould be geared towards creating productive employment in these three areas, while policies for a balanced, equitable and sustained development enhanced the synergies among the enabling mechanisms, activities and sectors involved.
Employment as a means of reducing inequalities
    The reduction of inequalities through decent employment creation (including social security) is important because:
    (a) Employment is the main source of income and welfare for the majority of working people around the world;
    (b) Employment has the capacity to reduce economic insecurity: its importance increases for people descending the income ladder;
    (c) Employment strengthens peopleís capacity to be resilient to macroshocks associated with economic crises and natural hazards;
    (d)  As noted above, reducing vulnerable employment is a prerequisite for reducing income inequalities in low- and lower middle income countries.
The quality of employment matters as much as its quantity
Both the quantity of employment (as measured, e.g., by the number of job opportunities and their duration) and the quality of employment (as measured, e.g., by decent wages, the provision of social security and career development) can also affect the degree of economic security and resilience to shocks enjoyed by people and countries. High-quality employment entails (a) a formal (written) job contract, (b) a high probability of stability and continuity (in either the same or a different firm), (c) health and safety at work, (d) freedom of association and collective bargaining and (e) social security and a path for career development.
    Similarly, the quantity and quality of the income stream (derived from a particular type of employment or occupation) can also affect the degree of economic security and resilience to shocks. For example, a steady flow of income, equal or above a predetermined living wage and providing a ìdecent livingî, can reduce economic insecurity, improve resilience to shocks and reduce inequalities.
    On the other hand, even though occupations that provide low wages can be a source of secure employment and income, workers might still be economically insecure if they lack sufficient income to pay for necessities. This can be the case for workers, both natives and immigrants, in many manual occupations.  
    On the whole, stable and good-quality employment plus a steady flow of income above a living wage can greatly strengthen economic security. Higher labour productivity is also expected under conditions of quality employment and income. In contrast, vulnerable employment is typically associated with income insecurity, which increases the possibility of economic insecurity and higher inequality.
     From a policy perspective, Stockhammer (2013) suggests that income distribution might depend primarily on the structure of the financial system and on social institutions. In particular, the strengthening of the welfare state and financial regulation can support the increase in wage shares with minimum costs to economic efficiency.
Employment creation and sustainable development
Secure, stable and well-paid employment in a productive activity that enhances human well-being and environment protection can have a synergetic effect on the strengthening of sustainable development. Figure III.9 presents the employment dimension in the context of the three pillars of sustainable development, encompassing the linkages of employment with more balanced, environment-sensitive and equitable development. It is noteworthy that the elements integrated into different pillars have mutually reinforcing impacts and are often sources of employment. For example, public investment in physical and social infrastructure for high-quality education and health care can raise the labour productivity of people and, at the same time, represent long-term investment in their children.  Those investments can also complement effective investment in water management, recycling and waste reduction systems. Employment creation in these sectors would constitute one of the benefits of such investments. Similarly, the provision of a living wage should go hand in hand with, for example, the provision of social security and the improvement of peopleís capacities to make more efficient use of water and land. Indeed, employment creation with a view to providing of affordable and sound basic social services such as water, sanitation and housing facilities can have synergistic effects on water management and reduction of pollution (of water and air) and waste.
    While net employment creation would likely be the outcome or emergence of new activities linked to the environment, including the production and use of renewable sources of energy, understandably, there would also be trade-offs in terms of job creation and destruction as part of the process of restructuring traditional economic activities in sectors such as agriculture, construction, manufacturing and energy. In general, it is expected that countriesí development priorities and available resources, together with democratic consultations would guide the process of structural transformation in order to maximize the benefits for poverty reduction, e.g., through employment creation, and reduce the socioeconomic costs incurred through the efforts to ensure a more balanced and environment-sensitive development.
    More specifically, creation of good-quality employment is in line with an integrated approach to sustainable development since it encompasses:
       (a) Promoting decent employment in environmental protection activities such as land management, forest conservation, water management and clean energy production and use in industry, retrofitting of buildings, and development of recycling and waste reduction systems; 
       (b) Supporting employment in traditional activities capable of providing living wages sufficient to ensure that workers can afford a basic consumption basket, and including full social security benefits such as health insurance, training programmes and skill upgrading for career development. This will raise labour productivity, reduce health costs and improve the quality-of-life prospects of the next generation;
       (c) Promoting productive employment which can act as a main vehicle for accessing other resources such as a savings and credit system, so as to facilitate access to sound housing, land and business ventures. The aim of this process would be to strengthen a long-term vision of social development (including the well-being of present and future generations);
       (d) Strengthening steadier and more balanced and efficient economic growth in the medium term rather than fast economic growth in the short term.  This would mean better-quality growth based on employment-led strategies and the production of goods and services that enhance human well-being and the environment;
       (e) Diversification of the organization of production to include other forms of arrangements for firms such as cooperatives where ownership and resources for production can be shared more equally, reduce entry costs and enhance local and regional development. This could be complemented by provision of credit to small and medium-sized enterprises and regulation of speculative activities in financial markets.
    An integrated policy framework for an employment-centred economy would include labour-market policies and investment in economic restructuring and infrastructure (physical and social). Labour markets could be geared towards providing living wages, social security and career development to workers, e.g., skills upgrading, training and retraining, and job promotion. Effective economic restructuring, entailing the shift from a carbon- to a renewable energy-based economy, would need to include creation of the net employment arising from the incentives provided to producers as well as from the investment in infrastructure.
    The effectiveness of employment policies as a vehicle for reducing inequalities would result from strengthening the wage share of the functional distribution of income through generating higher wages and, increased employment and imposing higher taxes on top incomes and on consumption detrimental to the environment (a detailed discussion on redistributive polices is elaborated in chap. IV).
    Complementary policies are also important for an integrated policy framework. These could include support to science and technology for the development of abatement technologies and new processes, creation of new infrastructure and introduction of appropriate labour programmes in anticipation of processes of structural transformation, removal of discrimination in the labour and capital markets, and provision of finance for productive activities. In this context, a study on the forecasting of job creation from renewable energy deployment through a value-chain approach for the photovoltaic (PV) industries of Spain and Germany indicates the various degrees of employment intensity needed according to the economies of scale and technological development in place (Llera and others, 2013).
Structural transformation and policy frameworks
An employment-led development strategy needs to tackle the weakness of employment creation, its increasingly low quality and the diminishing wage share relative to gross domestic product (GDP). Yet, some developing countries, e.g., in Latin America and the Caribbean, have been able to curb both the decline in wage share and inequalities by reducing the earnings gap between high- and low-skill workers through wage policy, investment in education, productive employment programmes and increase of government transfers to the poor.
    A broader approach to structural transformation that focuses on the generation of decent employment as a vehicle for reducing inequalities implies long-term investment and adequate incentives for diversifying production structures and transforming social structures. The changes required would include the use of renewable energy sources for productive activities; efficiency in the production and use of resources, e.g., renewable energy, water and material inputs; the provision of minimum living wages and social protection mechanisms; the diversification of firmsí organizational structures, so as to include, e.g., private enterprises, cooperatives and joint ventures; and the delivery of high-quality and affordable social services, e.g., education and health. The present section elaborates on particular policy options for supporting these changes.  
Structural transformation and green taxes
The shift from a carbon-based to a clean energy-based economy entails a structural transformation in agriculture, industry and services. This change, as effected through state policies, would have direct impacts on the level and quality of employment, economic diversification, productivity, technological change, investment and economic growth. As such a transformation requires different types of labour-related qualifications, investment in high-quality and demand-driven education as well as skill upgrading will be key to supporting the economic diversification brought about by the structural transformation of the economy and society at large.
    An employment-led sustainable development strategy would need to consider a switch in respect of the incentives applied to the different factors of production. For example, the so-called green tax (representing ecological tax reform) could be imposed on the use of ìdirtyî energy, with the proceeds recycled to lower the cost of labour to employers, thereby providing incentives to economize on energy and use more labour. This means that countries intending to implement green taxes would be required to address existing tax and subsidy distortions including from subsidies to energy (coal and oil). Along the same lines, well-designed modern environmental standards could trigger innovation within firms, enhance competitiveness and improve the productivity of the resources used (see the Porter hypothesis, as set out in Porter and van der Linde, 1995). Based on numerous studies and reported experiences, it has been suggested that a double dividend in terms of environmental protection and employment creation is possible in the long term (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2004; Patuelli, Nijkamp and Pels, 2005; McNeill and Williams, 2007). An employment dividend is possible when revenues are recycled in the form of lower labour taxation; the larger the revenues to be recycled, the greater the employment-related impact.
    The change necessary in economic thinking should also be taken into account. The emphasis on obtaining a productivity of throughput that is higher than that of labour suggests a new economy that first and foremost prioritizes productive employment. This major issue would have to be discussed in policy circles with a view to shaping the structure of such an economy within a sustainable development framework.
    Moreover, effective adoption and implementation of green tax programmes underscore the importance of non-economic factors, such as long-term strategic planning, which should include (a) time and space for systematic provision of public information on the green tax and employment effects and (b) phasing in of the new taxes over a long period. Taxpayers should be able to understand the purpose of green taxes and the use of the revenues collected, so that mistrust of government intervention can be reduced. 
Minimum living wages
The impending increase of the minimum wage from an average of $11 to $15 per hour at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport in Washington State would make that minimum wage higher than the Washington State minimum wage of $9.19 per hour, the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour, the minimum wage of $12.93 per hour at San Francisco International Airport, and a recently proposed minimum wage of $10.10 per hour supported by the White House. Yet, if the minimum wage had kept pace with the average growth in productivity over the past 20 years, it would be about $17 per hour. 
    Only one half of the 151 countries for which data exist have a comprehensive system of minimum wages.  However, minimum wages can be instrumental in reducing inequalities by raising the incomes of the lowest echelons of society. A minimum living wage policy, in particular, should include the large number of self-employed and informal workers, who often constitute a sizeable portion of the vulnerable employed in developing countries. Countries such as Brazil, Argentina and the Republic of Korea have started to implement social security programmes that include informal workers. Although controversy persists on whether higher minimum wages create or reduce employment, specialists agree by and large on their capacity to stimulate effective demand (Jacobs and älaus, 2011). 
    More broadly, as revealed in the volume edited by GautiÈ and Smith (2010) on low-wage work and national labour-market institutions, including industry case studies for Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of America, countries, like Denmark and France, with more inclusive labour-market institutions, including minimum wages, non-wage benefits and collective bargaining, tend to have a low share of low-wage work. Along these lines, ILO (2013d) argues that minimum wages can help rebalance the economy by strengthening effective demand and promoting a more balanced distribution of economic growth. Similarly, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) (2013) estimates that Thailandís recent minimum wage adjustment can boost GDP growth by 0.7 per cent and job growth by 0.6 per cent by 2015. 
    Well-designed minimum wage systems can also support the improvement of incomes in the informal economy. A cross-country study of 19 Latin American and Caribbean countries by Kristensen and Cunningham (2006) found that minimum wages affected the wage distribution in both the formal and the informal sector. In countries where the minimum wage was relatively low compared with mean wages, the minimum wage affected the poorest and most vulnerable such as informal workers, women, young and older workers, and the low-skilled; but in countries where the minimum wage was relatively high compared with the wage distribution, it mainly affected high-skilled. Similarly, a study of 18 Latin American countries for the period 1990-2009 examined the determinants of changes in the Gini of net disposable income using a stepwise regression analysis with 14 explanatory variables. Policy instruments used included (a) real effective exchange rates (b) the ratio of direct to indirect tax revenue (c) social security expenditure as a proportion of GDP and (d) the minimum wage index. The study found that the minimum wage exerted a modest but statistically significant equalizing effect (Cornia, 2014). In her study of Argentina, Khamis (2008) also found that workers without social security contributions (informal workers) experienced significant increases in wages when the minimum wage was raised, while formal workers did not. On the other hand, in Slonimczyk and Skott (2012), regressions on United States data for 1979-2002 indicated that the fall of the minimum wage led to the deterioration of employment and the relative wage of the low-skill workers and an increase in the underemployment of high-skill workers. Moreover, a fall in the minimum wage can produce a rise in within- and between-group inequalities.
    In general, countriesí minimum wages can be more effective if level, coverage and compliance are improved. When minimum wages are too low relative to the median wage of a poor country, their impact on reducing poverty and inequality will be small, which explains why in countries with widespread poverty, minimum wages can be a powerful policy tool for reducing poverty when they are upgraded to the living level. This level can correspond to the cost of the basic basket of goods and services needed to be able to live above the poverty line (see box III.3 for the case of Ecuador). 
    Inadequate levels of minimum wages in countries with multiple minimum wages, such as Honduras, can end up reducing the total earnings of workers in large firms, owing to the negative impact on employment, with no discernible effects being observable on the wages of workers in small firms or the self-employed (Gindling and Terrell, 2009). Benassi (2011) suggests that the role of the state as employer of last resort, making the process of the implementation of the minimum wage more transparent, and using the minimum wage as a prequisite for loans and procurement contracts, can greatly improve compliance with minimum-wage legislation. 
      Proposed directly below are associative forms of investment and production as a means of strengthening the diversification of organizational structures which can generate decent employment and reduce inequalities.
Cooperative forms of employment creation and production
At this historical juncture, the material production of wealth and its distribution call for the support of firms where cooperation, sharing and rewards for exercising social responsibility become a distinctive means of maximizing the benefits for sustainable development.
    Sobhan (2013) offers various proposals on how the poor can obtain an equity stake in productive and competitive projects. For instance, landownership would give the poor access to water and forestry resources, which can be used as an equity stake for more direct participation in sustainable development enterprises. Similarly, communities and populations that live in areas where natural resources are extracted should be able to obtain an equity stake in the value added processes of extraction and industrialization. Moreover, institutions and opportunities can be created to allow the poor to become corporate partners in major infrastructure projects such as bridges, roads and clinics. Thousands of low-income people who have savings might be willing to invest part of their resources in order to become stakeholders in an enterprise.
    Another model for collective ownership is the Self Employed Womenís Association (SEWA) in Gujarat, India, which is identified as a trade union and cooperative by its 2 million female members and workers. Another model is the Lijjat cooperative enterprise, owned by 40,000 poor women, which has become the single largest poppadom producer in India. Those women produce poppadoms in their homes (Sobhan, 2013). 
    In the case of State-owned enterprises in China, Shi and Liu (2012) affirm the need for reforms in two dimensions: economic efficiency and social welfare. In respect of the former, the goal should be to build a pluralized and socialized national system of equity capital, and in this regard, raise the management standards and economic competitiveness of firms and sustain their long-term growth and development. In respect of social welfare, they deem that a socialized modern system for managing national wealth that would be beneficial to all people could provide a sustained foundation for a socialist society. More concretely, the assets of State-owned enterprises would be converted into three types of socialized capital: public benefit capital (for non-profit organizations); national equity capital (through professional capital management companies); and national annuity capital (monetary capital derived from the liquidation of the assets of State-owned enterprises).
    The so-called solidarity economy, which promotes norms of social reciprocity, equality and collaboration, can also be seen as part of the third sector in which economic activity expresses practical solidarity with disadvantaged groups of people, in contrast with (a) the private sector, where economic activity is aimed at generating profits and (b) the public sector, where economic activity is directed towards achieving public policy objectives. It can also be viewed as a model for those seeking to build an economy and culture of greater solidarity. 
    A few of the most important entities of the solidarity economy are: (a) fair trade organizations which try to express practical solidarity with farmers in the developing world by paying them fair prices for their produce, (b) self-help organizations, whose members express a practical form of solidarity by supporting each other in dealing with their problems and (c) cooperatives, especially worker cooperatives.
    There are challenges that the solidarity economy would have to overcome, such as scaling up from small to medium-sized and large firms, and building partnerships between business and public organizations in order to foster development. For instance, in Uruguay, social solidarity economy organizations, mainly non-governmental organizations, in partnership with the State, have worked to provide social services to the poorest. Such partnerships have grown and become a key catalyst in strengthening the capacity of the nationís welfare system. However, some people perceive that the partnerships might also weaken the solidarity economyís capacity to achieve its full potential. The strong dependence on the State for resources, market competition, and the loss of autonomy related to the delivery of public social services could jeopardize the political sustainability of future partnerships.
Learning from experience
The present section examines investment programmes and policies in countries of Asia and the Caribbean directed towards generating employment and protecting the vulnerable from economic and environmental ìshocksî.  It also presents a typology of countries classified according to their achievements in the areas of inequality reduction and the provision of social security and social services. Further, the annex to this chapter presents a survey of inequality and employment outcomes in a sample of countries with diverse levels of income per capita and a diversity of profiles in respect of investment in infrastructure (e.g., education and health), social protection, minimum wage levels and collective bargaining.
Employment programmes designed to reduce inequalities in Asia
Concerns about job quality are pervasive throughout the region, where the majority of workers face poor working conditions in informal and vulnerable employment. The share of the labour force working in agriculture is larger than the share of agricultural value added in GDP in many countries, implying low productivity and wages. For instance, in Nepal, India and Viet Nam, more than half of the labour force is employed in agriculture, whereas the share of agriculture in GDP ranges from 14 per cent (India) to 35 per cent (Nepal). Similarly, in Papua New Guinea, about 90 per cent of the labour force is occupied in rural areas, although, agriculture contributes only about 36 per cent to GDP. 
    A significant share of workers employed outside of the agricultural sector are in informal employment, which comprises small enterprises of fewer than five workers, self-employed own-account workers, unpaid family helpers and workers with no proper contract in the formal sector. Based on available data for recent years, more than 50 per cent of total employment in Indonesia and Thailand, as well as more than 60 per cent in Pakistan and Viet Nam, is classified as own-account and contributing family work. This situation affects young people especially, who continue to face serious challenges in securing decent and productive employment, as witnessed by a youth unemployment rate that is almost three times the adult unemployment rate in the region. Notably, women are more likely than men to work in vulnerable employment. In Pakistan, for instance, the share of employment as own-account and contributing family workers was 23.4 percentage points higher for women than for men.
      Job guarantee schemes for educated unemployed youths linked to active labour-market programmes can contribute to improving the skill set of these workers, thereby improving their employment prospects. Such programmes, focused on infrastructure development, reduction of soil erosion and irrigation, for example, can also enhance productive capacities. Similarly, employment activities can be created around environmental services and the restructuring of buildings and public infrastructure to render them more energy-efficient. Investments in social infrastructure can also enable the building of schools and health centres, thereby boosting employment and improving the access of adults and their children to basic social services. Thus, at the same time, such investments constitute investments in the next generation. 
    Several important job guarantee schemes targeting vulnerable groups have been introduced in the Asia-Pacific region. In India, for instance, the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGREGS) has operated since 2005. This scheme, which offers a guarantee of employment for 100 days to every rural household within a programme district that has an adult willing to work at casual labour at the minimum wage, has become the largest employment programme in the world, having provided nearly 53 million rural households with employment in fiscal year 2009/10. Similar schemes have also been introduced in Bangladesh, the largest of which is  Employment Generation for the Hard-Core Poor (EGHP). This scheme also provides 100 days of employment, and targets primarily the extremely poor who have no assets, are completely or seasonally unemployed, are marginal farmers or are otherwise excluded from any social safety net programme. 
    These job guarantee schemes have had an important impact on poverty by creating a safety net for informal workers. They have also strengthened rural growth by improving the resource base of the rural economy and providing important agriculture infrastructure. In this regard, the ESCAP (2013) estimated the amount of public investment required for an illustrative package of policies to promote sustainable development in the Asia-Pacific region: the public investment required to provide an employment guarantee for 100 days per year to all workers in the informal sector (including agriculture), at a wage equivalent to the national poverty line, would cost less than 1 per cent of GDP per year in China, Malaysia and the Russian Federation, and  2-3 per cent of GDP per year in India, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Turkey.  Such an investment is fiscally affordable in most countries of the region and would not jeopardize inflation stability or debt sustainability, as there will be a growth dividend. It would also contribute significantly to reducing levels of inequality and poverty.
    Special attention should be given to well-designed active labour-market programmes whose goal is to reduce youth unemployment and harness the potential of the demographic dividend by improving linkages among education, training and work. Active labour-market programmes not only improve employability of workers, but also reduce the search and retraining costs borne by prospective employers, thereby improving labour demand.  Some of these programmes include employment subsidies. For instance, in response to the global economic crisis, Turkey introduced wage subsidies by publicly financing social security contributions paid by the employer for a period of up to 54 months for newly hired workers, depending on the age, status and qualification level of the employee. By doing so, Turkey enabled more than 125,000 new young workers (aged 18-29) to be employed in 2009 and 2010. Moreover, an additional 140,000 employees who had previously been unemployed for more than three months also found employment in those years. Tax reforms can also be initiated to encourage job creation. For instance, in the Republic of Korea, tax credits have been introduced to offset the burden of social security premiums arising from employment growth imposed on small and medium-sized enterprises, while youth that are employed by such enterprises are totally exempted from paying income tax for up to three years. 
Policies in the Caribbean region designed to reduce employment insecurity and social vulnerability
The Caribbean archipelago is under the constant threat of environmental and economic shocks. The exposure of the eastern Caribbean region to natural disasters is 12 times greater than the world average, owing mainly to its location in a hurricane belt and seismically active area. These circumstances put significant strain on public finances and the capacity of the private sector, particularly the tourism and commodity export sectors, for investment and growth.  Moreover, a few of the island nations that are at a distance from global markets tend to be poorer than others because of high transport costs. This remoteness is also responsible for diminished access to communications infrastructure and information technology and for the large-scale emigration of trained professionals. 
    In spite of these limitations, many Caribbean countries have been able to register significant achievements, particularly in the area of employment. In the last three decades, vulnerable employment in the Caribbean region has averaged only 19 per cent, a figure much lower than the world average of 53 per cent, and the rates for Latin American countries (32 per cent) and South-East Asia and the Pacific (65 per cent) (International Labour Organization, 2011). The strategy adopted included labour-market policies prioritizing the preservation of jobs and incomes. Following the failure of labour- market deregulation policies during the 1990s (including flexible hiring practices, decentralized collective bargaining, reduced costs for layoffs and outsourcing, and lower real minimum wage and non-wage labour costs), many Caribbean countries returned to the regulation of labour markets, with measures like increasing the minimum wage, strengthening collective bargaining, restricting temporary hiring and outsourcing and conducting labour inspections. Further, in order to protect vulnerable groups from economic and environmental shocks in the 2000s, countries introduced and enhanced social spending, with emphasis given to conditional transfer programmes as well as food support and low-cost housing programmes. Table III.1 below provides an overview of some of the policies adopted by Caribbean countries mainly in response to the great recession of 2008-2009.
    The sharp increase in nominal wages in some countries in 2008 followed by a fall in inflation in 2009 allowed a significant portion of the wage increase to be translated into real gains. The pursuit of minimum-wage policies at this time also led to an increase in real minimum wages. Moreover, a number of countries made an effort to protect jobs; in fact, there was a slight growth in formal employment despite a fall in GDP in 2009. 
Typology for inequalities, social security and social services
Based on the analyses provided above and country information, as set out in the annex to this chapter, roughly three types of socioeconomic and labour-market regimes can be identified and characterized as follows:
       (a) Low inequality, high wages and universal access to social security and social services (e.g., Denmark and Sweden);
       (b) High inequality, a sizeable share of low-wage occupations and relatively wide access to social security and social services (e.g., Costa Rica and Ecuador);
       (c) High inequality, low wages and inadequate access to social services and social security (mainly low and lower middle income countries).
The cases of Denmark and Sweden
Both Denmark and Sweden have long viewed economic and wage growth as necessary but not sufficient conditions for bringing prosperity to their populations. These are countries with a strong social investment base which includes the provision of social reproduction services to facilitate a more balanced family-work schedule for both parents. Sweden, for its part, has emphasized providing universal access to social services since the early twentieth century. Both countries also rely on a social contract between workers unions and employersí organizations, with the State as mediator to deflate possible significant conflicts. Box III.2 analyses the structure of, and sources of finance under, Sweden's social insurance model.
    While both countries have been characterized by a strong drive for industrialization since the 1950s, public intervention in Sweden has concentrated on supporting firms so as to enable them to compete internationally, favouring technological progress and economies of scale, as exemplified by the company IKEA. In contrast, Denmarkís strength, lies in the particular character of its labour market. For example, while employers are assured flexibility in respect of firing workers, there is also space provided for high levels of social mobility and a cushion of strong social protection for workers.
    From the policy perspective, empirical evidence suggests that income distribution depends significantly on the structure of social institutions (see Stockhammer, 2013). In particular, strengthening the welfare state and financial regulation can support an increase in wage shares with minimum costs to economic efficiency.  
Box III.2: Sweden's welfare system 
Sweden's welfare system is financed mainly by various taxes (general taxes such as the value added tax paid by the Government, taxes on employees and taxes on employers). Sweden's welfare state includes one public insurance system and one negotiated system that is related to labour-market participation. Public social insurance covers all residents of the country and provides a safety net under three different forms of insurance. 
    The first form, parental insurance, is related to family policy, and aims at guaranteeing a reasonable standard of living for all children. It includes compensation for parents staying away from work to care for sick children, child allowances, and housing allowances for families with children under age 18. The second form is age-related insurance, whose goal is to guarantee a reasonable standard of living for elderly people. While the main element in this category is the national basic pension, there are also widowís pensions, housing allowances for the elderly with low incomes, and various early retirement programmes. The third large component is public-health insurance, whose main goal is to provide compensation for income losses related to sickness. The benefits include sickness allowance, temporary disability pensions, disability pensions, early retirement pensions, and industrial injury compensation.
    Parental insurance plays an important role through its impact on the labour market: women are to a large extent employed outside of the household. The high labour-market participation rate for women is considered important based on two considerations: equality and tax revenue. Having independent income (that is taxed separately from their spouseís income), women are able to become more independent than they would be in systems where they depend on their husband. A high employment rate is also necessary to generate the tax revenues needed to finance the welfare state. Sweden has avoided taxing capital and focused instead on taxation of labour income and consumption (through the value added tax).
    Until the 1990s, the pension system was, in principle, a pay-as-you-go plan, where the current contributors funded pension payments to retired beneficiaries. However, the combination of an ageing population and decreasing productivity growth started to put pressure on the system. There were also concerns about redistributive effects. More affluent population groups tend to study longer and live longer than poorer groups, thereby contributing over fewer years and collecting pensions over a longer period. 
    A structural reform was introduced in the early 1990s. For one thing, the income-related part of the pension is now based on the individualís total income during all the years of labour-market participation (rather than on the last few years when earnings are typically highest), and there is no automatic adjustment to inflation, but rather to the average work income in society. The monthly amount of pension benefits is not guaranteed, but calculated instead on the basis of life expectancy. If the average life expectancy increases, the monthly amounts will have to be reduced. Individual pension accounts have also been established and some of the funds are invested according to the individual choices of policyholders. However, the shift from a pay-as-you-go system to a funded system could not have been effected without putting an extra burden on some generations. During the transition process, the working population not only funded the pensions of elderly people who did not accumulate any resources for a fully funded system, but also accumulated funds for their own pensions. 
    Health insurance makes up the second largest component of Sweden's social insurance system (retirement pensions are the largest). Health-care costs are in principle covered through the general budget. Currently, the main function of health insurance is to protect against income losses caused by ill health. Like many of the other major components of Sweden's welfare state, universal health insurance had been introduced in the 1950s. By the late 1980s, it covered 100 per cent of income losses starting from the first sick day, with only a small reduction in benefits in cases where the illness lasted for more than three months.
    However, there was a substantial reduction in the compensation level in 1991, and frequent changes in the rules between 1993 and 1998. Consequently, the benefits have been less generous when the public budget was under pressure, in particular during the financial crisis in the early 1990s, but attempts have been made to restore previous compensation levels when the financial situation was less severe.
    Negotiated social insurance is built upon agreements between employers and workers on the labour market. The negotiations are held at the central level (between representatives for the national labour unions and the national employersí federation), and cover the participants in the labour force. The negotiated agreements are complementary to public social insurance, although the distinction between the two forms of insurance is not always clear. Negotiated social insurance covers areas such as compensation in case of disease and occupational injury, unemployment benefits, income-related old-age pensions and death benefits.
END BOX
The cases of Costa Rica and Ecuador
During the period 1950-1980, Costa Rica was able to combine steady economic growth with the operation of a strong social redistribution system. Policies that supported well-paid and stable jobs in industry and public affairs created virtuous cycles of increasing effective demand, fiscal revenues and human development. Economic diversification, supported by a sustained industrialization process geared to domestic and foreign markets, generated revenues allowing for higher wages, increased personal consumption and investment in high-quality education, health care and social protection. Highly educated, healthy people with good jobs raised general productivity and contributed to balanced population growth. As a result, levels of access to water and sanitation and social security, for both rural and urban areas, are higher than for the rest of Latin America (MartÌnez Franzoni and S·nchez-Ancochea, 2013). Although neoliberal macroeconomic policies implemented since the 1980s have partly dismantled public intervention and weakened social protection mechanisms (e.g., old age pensions), Costa Ricaís achievements in the areas of employment, social security and reduction of inequalities have still been significantly greater than those of other developing countries.
 	In Ecuador, socioeconomic and environmental programmes include the exploratory search for, and exploitation of, natural resources conducted according to the highest technological and environmental standards (e.g., those applying to oil, gas and mining) in order to minimize the negative impact on the environment and maximize the development impact on communities where those resources are located. Public revenues are being used to develop the tourism industry and environmental services (reforestation), while favouring the employment of people in those communities. Investment in land improvement and clean-up technology for rivers and water sources also creates employment and reduces environmental and health costs. Box III.3 provides additional information on the policies and measures implemented by Ecuador over the past six years, with a view to promoting employment creation and reducing inequalities.
Box III.3: The progress of Ecuador
Since 2007, the Government of Ecuador has been engaged in reducing inequality and poverty. An integrated package of policies led to positive results in a relatively short period. Inequality in Ecuador decreased faster than the average for the region: the Gini coefficient fell from 54 in 2007 to 46 in 2011, and between 2006 and 2009, the share of the middle class in total population  increased from 20 to 26 per cent. Income growth among the poorest citizens surpassed the average for the total population, with highest growth occurring in the poorest quintiles of the population. Income of the poorest 40 per cent of the population rose 8.8 per cent compared with an average of 5.8 per cent for the total population. 
 Along the same lines, between 2006 and 2012, income poverty (measured using the national poverty line) fell from 37.6 to 27.3 per cent and extreme poverty declined from 16.9 to 11.2 per cent.
 Policies have also prioritized strengthening the productive base and improvement of the Governmentís planning capacity. In 2011 and 2012, economic growth reached 7.8 and 5.1 per cent, respectively, a high level for the Latin American region. A large share of resources is allocated to programmes and projects geared towards investment in infrastructure and social sectors (e.g., free education and health care), with public investment having increased from†21 per cent of GDP in 2006 to nearly 42 per cent in 2012.† 
Complementary measures:
(a) A much more progressive taxation system and tax reform to facilitate, for example, more reliance on direct rather than indirect taxation, and improvement in collection through controls and incentives: tax pressure rose from 10 to 14 per cent;
(b) Zero taxes for the agricultural sector;
(c) Renegotiation of contracts with oil multinationals: e.g., 85 per cent of income per barrel and 55 per cent of mining rent are appropriated by Ecuador;
(d) Freeing of resources by means of the reduction of foreign debt through selling of public debt at market value: the ratio of debt to GDP fell from 8 to 4 per cent;
(e)  Salario digno (honourable wage): the real wage has reduced the gap between family income and the cost of a basic basket of consumption goods, with the proportion of families able to afford the basic basket having gone from 65 per cent to 95 per cent. The minimum basic monthly wage is US$ 340;
(f) Social contract: private firms cannot distribute dividends if the honourable wage has not been paid to workers;
(g) Reduction of interest rates to 8-9 per cent.
 Yet, sustainable development challenges remain. A sizeable part of public investments still depend on the oil sector, while more than half of the population of Ecuador continues to live in poverty or is vulnerable to falling below the poverty line. 
END BOX
 The case of low-income countries
While data on vulnerable employment and inequality are either scanty or obsolete, the fact remains that the labour markets of low-income countries are characterized by a large share of informal employment often representing over 80-90 per cent of total employment, and mostly in cities that are the product of rapid and unplanned urbanization processes. Economic growth has frequently been volatile and was often negative during the 1980s-1990s. In spite of rapid urbanization and with an even more rapid pace expected in the next decades, these economies are mainly rural, subject to the vagaries of rain-fed agriculture, the gyrations of international commodity prices, and a high fertility rate. In Kenya and Zimbabwe, for example, double-digit unemployment rates go hand in hand with increased of informalization of employment, while in Nigeria and Gabon, for example, the revenues created by oil exports deepen inequalities.  
	On the whole, a long-term perspective and a comprehensive set of policies that cut across social, political, economic and environmental sectors are important for improving the quality of employment outcomes and reduction in inequalities. Development and good use of institutional structures designed to regulate labour markets, as well as carefully designed macroeconomic policies, are important for structural transformation and sustainable development. The Gini Growing Inequalitiesí Impacts study elaborated by the Seventh Framework Programme (2013) for 30 developed countries during 1980-2010 highlights the important role of institutions and policies, including education, in reducing inequalities. It concludes that ìthe best performers among the rich countries in terms of economic, employment, social cohesion and equality outcomes have one thing in common: a large welfare state that invests in people, stimulating and supporting them to be active and also adequately protecting them and their children when everything else failsî. Broadly, the survey presented in the annex also evidences that countries that invested significantly in infrastructure, social protection and institution-building (including collective bargaining) (e.g., Estonia, Finland and Germany), have fared better in terms of employment and inequality outcomes than countries that did not so invest (Indonesia, Thailand and Viet Nam). Box III.4 synthesizes policy guidelines for reducing vulnerable employment and inequalities across the world, charting a feasible route for building sustainable development pathways. 
Box III.4: What can we learn from experiences in reducing inequality?
* The pursuit of economic growth should be directed towards investment in physical and social infrastructures that can provide good-quality employment  
* Economic growth should be pursued within the framework of productive activities capable of generating the highest levels of employment and environmental gains
* Creation of good-quality employment and universal access to social services should be the overarching objectives when setting priorities on how to use the public revenue enabled by economic growth
* Access to basic income and good-quality of employment, education, health care, housing and transportation can be starting points on the path towards reducing extreme and absolute poverty
* The attainment of equal access to productive employment opportunities (economic, social and political) enhances the cohesion of societies and can make inequality of outcomes irrelevant
* Taxing the wealthy and consumers with a high carbon footprint should go hand in hand with incentives for investment in employment-rich productive activities and rewards for socially responsible citizens
* Given the fact that renewable sources of energy are finite and that environmental resources need to be protected, the creation of firms that maximize cooperation in respect of productive activities and shared use of resources (equipment and space) and public services should be actively supported
* Governments confront the challenge of fostering policies and institutions that promote green investment, build social consensus, and maintain stable regulatory frameworks for a balanced and inclusive development

Ch IV: Redistributive Policy Frameworks
Introduction
The cooperative nature of wealth creation stands in sharp contrast with the growing concentration of income and wealth, pointing to economic and political governance challenges in many countries and at the international level. Redistributive policy interventions are a core component of strategies for reducing inequality and for promoting sustainable development in its three dimensions: economic, social and environmental. They provide important policy tools for improving equality of outcome through the redistribution of income as well as for enhancing equality of opportunity. Beyond their potential for reducing inequality, redistributive policies are also conducive for promoting values that are consistent with sustainable development and for shaping incentives to move towards greater financial stability, enhance economic development, promote political inclusion, gender equality and social mobility, as well as environmental sustainability.
Redistributive policy frameworks available to governments can be divided in three broad categories, namely the provision of public goods and services, the redistribution of income and the redistribution of wealth. Government revenue to support public expenditure including redistributive actions can be collected in a wide variety of ways, including through taxation of (a) income from production and trade; (b) wealth, based on accumulated investment and savings; and (c) harmful environmental externalities arising from unsustainable production and consumption. Under specific conditions, public ownership of income-generating assets, such as natural resources, can also increase revenue mobilization and may potentially foster better and sustainable management of finite resources to the benefit of current and future generation.
This chapter discusses challenges and opportunities facing redistributive policies in support of reducing inequality for sustainable development. It first seeks to define the potential scope of redistributive policies and linkages to equity and sustainable development. It then surveys major long-term trends in redistributive policies during the last three decades, before suggesting steps to move towards a framework enabling redistributive policies for greater equity and sustainable development.
Redistributive policy frameworks and sustainable development
An analytical framework
The asymmetric distribution of income-generating assets across individuals generates asymmetric labour and capital income flows. These flows are shaped by policy frameworks that govern their structural distribution across private agents as well as between the public and private sectors. Income-generating assets are a key determinant of equality of opportunity; they include human capital embodied in people, such as education and knowledge, as well as property rights ensuring rents to owners of land, industrial and financial capital. While progress towards the MDGs has fostered human capital and improved its distribution across countries and social groups (UNDP 2013), wealth remains highly concentrated at the global level, with the top 1 per cent owning 40 per cent of global wealth (UNDP 2014) and the 85 richest individuals having an estimated net worth equivalent to that of the poorest half of the planet (Oxfam 2014). At the domestic level, wealth is similarly concentrated, with the top decile controlling between 70 per cent to 90 per cent of total national wealth in many countries (Davies and others, 2011, Piketty, 2013). 
The Millennium Development Goals strongly emphasized the need for increasing public social spending on education and health, amongst others, in order to foster human capital, reduce extreme poverty reduction and promote economic development. Yet, the current level of economic development and weak political coalitions still prevent many countries from raising the tax revenue required to expand government services beyond mere basic security services in order to fund transfers to a level required to eradicate poverty, reduce inequality and promote social welfare. 
In developed countries, in contrast to developing countries, direct tax revenues are generally higher and tax revenue composition is more progressive. They provide the means for direct financial transfers from governments to households which help to stabilize disposable income and thus protect vulnerable groups against price and income fluctuations. Developing countries typically rely much more on indirect tax revenue, which is often regressive; this implies that it is even more important that transfers are focused on low-income households in order to contribute to reducing inequality. Yet, indirect taxes can be compatible with greater equity and achieving sustainable development, depending on implementation modalities. For instance, value-added tax on luxury goods and taxes on frequent flyers (instead of air miles reward programmes) could provide incentives for more sustainable consumption and production. In general terms, the taxation of negative externalities could assist in the quest for reducing inequality and at the same time contribute to achieving sustainable development, as will be explored in section 3.4 below.
Wealth redistribution among private actors and its potential for enhancing economic efficiency and sustainable development is often disregarded as a feasible redistributive policy framework. Nevertheless, under certain conditions, wealth transfers, such as land reform or tenancy reform, can induce more efficient and sustainable land use (Sobhan 2010, Moyo 2013). The taxation of wealth can enhance economic efficiency more than taxing labour income, because it incentivizes wealth holders to re-invest their capital (Stiglitz and Dasgupta 1971, Piketty 2013).
Figure IV.1 provides an analytical framework for mapping the redistributive policy instruments that are discussed in this chapter as well as some of the key linkages to equity and sustainable development. This framework is centred on income-generating assets as they play a key role in shaping income along with transfers and taxes, which have been regrouped in three broad categories, including the provision of public goods, income redistribution and wealth redistribution.
Stylized facts about redistributive policy frameworks 
The impact of redistribution at the global level 
The impact of redistributive policies on income inequality can be significant, but it varies across countries and over time as redistributive policies are shaped by domestic factors, such as demographic, economic and political conditions. At the global level, the impact of redistributive policies was strongly influenced by major wars and geo-strategic shifts. Following a period of strong economic growth and redistribution that reduced income inequality in many countries after the Second World War, the changing policy frameworks, especially in most developed countries since the middle of the 1980s, have not been able to stem rising income inequality. 
Market income inequality increased rapidly starting from the mid-1980s, measured at either the level of market inequality or in terms of net disposable income. Since the early 1980s, the average population-weighted market Gini rose by 7 percentage points to 47,7 while the disposable/net Gini increased by almost 7 percentage points to reach above 44 per cent in 2010 (figure IV.2). Consequently, more than 75 per cent of the world population is today living in a context of much higher income inequality compared to 30 years ago. In order to return to the average level of disposable/net income inequality prevailing prior to 1985, redistributive policies would need to be expanded massively so as to reduce current disposable/net income inequality by an additional 6.8 Gini percentage points.
Figures IV.2 highlights a significant rise in income inequality over the decades. Yet it must be noted that the available data and sources may still tend to underestimate the prevailing extent of inequality. Survey-based income inequality measures, such as the Gini, often rely on data samples in which top incomes are under-represented and top-coded in surveys, with the highest observed incomes truncated to protect privacy. (Alvaredo, 2013). 
The reduction in income inequality that is observed when comparing market and net/disposable income distributions is mostly explained by direct transfers, which account for about 80 per cent of the reduction (IMF 2013, Cornia 2012). For several important reasons, this should not be interpreted as a proof that direct transfers are inherently more efficient than direct taxes for reducing disposable/net income inequality. First, taxes and transfers are not substitutes, and it is important that they complement each other in order to consistently reinforce the overall impact of redistributive policies. Secondly, direct tax collection in many countries is only weakly progressive and hence its impact on changing pre-tax market inequality should be expected to be limited. Furthermore, direct transfers can be funded by indirect tax revenue, which themselves often have a regressive effect. Finally, progressive direct taxes can have the effect of deterring excessively high compensation. 
Excessively high compensation has been identified as a key driver of rising market income inequality. Piketty, Saez and Stancheva (2014) show for a sample of 17 developed countries, covering the period from 1960-64 through to 2005-09 that those countries that have implemented the greatest reduction in top marginal tax rates on personal and corporate incomes have also experienced the most significant rise in the shares of income accruing to the top 1 per cent of incomes, without registering the promised higher economic growth (see figure IV.3). 
Top income shares used in figure IV.3 are estimated using fiscal data which are nottruncated, but nevertheless under-reporting of income to tax authorities is common and tax avoidance and tax evasion has grown over the last decade., top fiscal incomes often only represent a small fraction of the total top effective economic incomes. Tax avoidance and evasion de facto exclude substantial capital income flows from the tax accounts. (Palan and others, 2010, Zucman, 2013).
Redistributive policies for reducing inequality of outcome
The redistributive impact of taxes and transfers is most significant in developed countries, in accordance with the so-called Wagner Law,  which observes that government revenue/spending increases steadily with GDP, because of the gradual formalization of the economy and the related greater scope for raising taxes. Significant differences among countries with similar income levels, however, highlight the role of institutions, governance and political voice. 
In developed countries, the lowering of marginal tax rates on top incomes reduced the ability of redistributive policies to contain excessive compensation, but social protection measures stabilize the income of most vulnerable individuals and social groups, shielding them from extreme poverty and reducing income inequality to a limited extent. For example, in Western and Northern Europe, government tax and non-tax revenue and government expenditure amounted to around 45 per cent of sub-regional GDP in 2006. Comparing the market Gini (before direct taxes and transfers) with the net Gini, shows that direct taxes and transfers reduce income inequality by around 15 Gini percentage points. This reduction of inequality is about five times greater than the global average (see figure IV.4). 
In contrast, in developing countries the predominantly rural and informal economic structures and weaker tax administrations often prevent the development of progressive redistributive institutions (Joshi et al. 2012). Government (tax and non-tax) revenue and expenditure amount to between 20 to 35 per cent of GDP in most developing sub-regions, with a larger share of it being spent on basic security and other core functions of government. 
Sub-regions with a similar level of revenue and expenditure may have different redistributive outcomes, reflecting different income levels as well as different patterns of redistribution. For example, Southern Africa and Southern Europe each have levels of total revenue and expenditures amounting to around 40 per cent of regional GDP. Yet, the decrease of the Gini coefficient after direct taxes and transfers is much more pronounced in the Southern Europe region. This reflects the reliance of Southern African countries on indirect tax revenue as well as slightly larger capital expenditure, potentially resulting in higher economic growth but also in lesser redistribution and a persistent and high level of inequality. 
Direct monetary transfers through social protection programmes are the most direct way to alleviate poverty, but insufficient transfers and coverage as well as discriminatory practices often leave large segments of the population in developing countries vulnerable to temporary economic risks and enduring extreme poverty. Furthermore, gender-blind approaches to social protection often directly discriminate against women in developed and developing countries. In addition to employment and wage discrimination experienced in the labour market, most women standing at the crossroad of paid work and unpaid care work suffer the injustice of social insurance schemes that assume full-time, formal and life-long employment as the norm (Razavi et al. 2012). Increased gender awareness in the design of more ambitious social protection programmes is key for poverty reduction, gender equality and sustainable development.
Redistributive policies for enhancing equality of opportunity 
Public spending on education and health, which are key for building up a strong and productive labour force, has gained prominence in the development debate in the wake of the Millennium declaration that enshrined education and health objectives at the heart of the international development agenda (e.g., ensure universal access to primary education and gender equality in secondary education, reduce child and maternal mortality). Yet, with a few exceptions, public social spending increased only modestly in most developing countries. In 2010, public spending on education ranged between 3 and 6 per cent of GDP in most developing sub-regions, while public spending on health was still less than  2 per cent of GDP in some developing sub-regions. 
Increased public social spending generally fosters human development, but this link seems weaker in presence of high income inequality. Figure IV.5 shows that sub-regions with high income inequality are generally less successful in mobilizing resources for human development, such as public expenditure on health. Consequently, populations in these sub-regions face prospects of shorter life expectancy, one of the core-components of human development. 
Among developed countries, more unequal societies systematically experience more health and social issues, such as higher infant mortality, mental illnesses, drug and alcohol addiction, obesity, but also teenage births, lower levels of trust, social immobility as well as more homicides and higher incarceration rates. The negative impact of inequality on health and social cohesion in rich countries signals that well-being is about more than escaping material poverty and significantly depends on social structures and symbolic hierarchies, which are most clearly reflected in the degree of income inequality (Wilkinson and Pikett 2011).  Similar direct linkages exist with regard to education. A comparison of 13 developed countries highlighted that higher income inequality is consistently associated with lower inter-generational earnings and social mobility (Corak 2013). 
Wealth, including land, industrial and financial capital
Wealth inequality is more pronounced than income inequality as indicated by larger shares of wealth accruing to the top 10 per cent of recipients as compared with income. (See figure IV.6) Wealth concentration may represent an obstacle to sustainable development. In many countries, high concentration of land ownership contributes perpetuating inequality and eroding incentives for sustainable agricultural methods and land use (Sobhan 2010, Moyo 2013). Similarly, concentrated ownership structures of industrial or financial capital heighten risks of market power abuse and the unequal distribution of economic gains, resulting in persistent inequality.
 
Wealth concentration can be particularly problematic when the after-tax return on capital (r) is higher than economic growth (g). For instance, if r=5 per cent and g=1 per cent, the split between capital income and labour income will remain stable only as long as wealth holders consume 80 per cent of their capital rent and reinvest the remaining 20 per cent, but it will start growing if wealth-holders reinvest more than 20 per cent of capital income. Furthermore, wealth concentration may increase steadily even if the split between capital income and labour income remains stable at the aggregate level (Piketty 2013). Governments capability to boost technological innovation and economic growth (g) in the long run may be limited. Many governments have however implemented policies boosting the after-tax return on capital (r) over the last three decades, with little regard for rising inequality and possible negative effects on long-term economic growth (Ostry and Berg 2011, Ostry et al. 2014).
The reinforcing interaction between capital accumulation, income and wealth concentration can be documented for developed countries for which inequality can be assessed based on long-term fiscal data capturing information about the top of the income and wealth distribution. Figure IV.6 represents the wealth and income share of the top decile in the United States and selected European countries.  The figure illustrates how the Great Depression followed by the Second World War depleted the aggregate capital stock in the first part of the twentieth century in the United States and especially in the European countries. The process of capital accumulation resumed after the Second World War, which tends to increase the role of wealth as a determinant of income. Wealth concentration declined in the European countries during the period (1945-1975). This period was characterized by intense reconstruction efforts in combination with progressive taxation keeping after-tax returns on capital below to economic growth (r<g). With weaker economic growth in the wake of the oil shocks and reforms that boosted the after-tax return on capital (r>g), rising income inequality first resumed in the United States around 1980, followed by a similar pattern in European countries.  Piketty has argued that this may point to ëan emergence of a new patrimonial capitalismí of the type that predominated in European countries in the 19th century albeit with a more globalized character (Piketty, 2014, p.173).
Redistributive policy trends in a changing context
The public economics approach to redistributive policies
The standard public economics approach suggests that governments should intervene, including through redistributive policies, whenever markets fail, i.e., when markets undersupply or oversupply in relation to what is considered desirable (e.g., the development of strategic sectors, economic efficiency, social fairness, environmental sustainability). Market failures are very common and occur in case of imperfect competition, natural monopolies, asymmetric information, merit goods, pure public goods as well as positive/negative externalities. 
In the wake of the Second World War, many governments pursued this approach to guide their redistributive policies and were strongly involved in economic management. Although the overarching objective was that of pursuing economic growth, redistributive policies were explicitly used to support industrial policies, ensure the provision of public goods and correct socially undesirable outcomes. Income redistribution and, to a lesser extent, wealth redistributive policy frameworks were used. In developing countries, import-substitution and export-promotion strategies also required substantial policy interventions. The predominantly rural and informal nature of their economy and political economy factors often limited the scope and development of redistributive policies and institutions.
Starting in the late 1970s, the approach to economic policy-making in general and redistributive policies in particular changed in favour of lesser government intervention. Governments were increasingly portrayed as preventing the optimal allocation of factors of production across domestic and international markets. This enduring shift in public discourse emphasized the role of private investment as the main driver of economic growth and technological progress and it encouraged a minimalist vision of the governmentís role. Public policy focused on privatization of public income-generating assets (e.g., water supply, railroads, telecom, etc.). Lower total government revenue went hand in hand with lower public expenditure or, in some cases, an increase in public debt.
Figure IV.7 provides a schematic overview of the various public expenditure headings and public revenue sources. Some of the public revenues arise from publicly owned income generating assets, whereas other parts arise from tax revenues on income flows and consumption or investment expenditure. On the expenditure side, it is customary to distinguish between current expenditure (including salaries and social spending, etc) and capital expenditures (including depreciation and interest payments).       
Public expenditure
Public expenditure cuts during the 1980s and 90s.
On the expenditure side, the market-focused neo-liberal policies inspired by the public choice economic school fostered a resource-constrained approach to development, often at the cost of fundamental human needs (Sobhan 2010). This approach entailed cutting public expenditure, including social spending during the 1980s and 1990s. Table 1 shows the general decline in public expenditures during the 1980s and 1990s. During that period public expenditures and social spending decreased across all regions, except in parts of Asia. The decline was most pronounced in transition economies where the political and economic collapse of the USSR in the early 1990s was followed by the extensive privatization of production and social services, and an abrupt fall in social spending.
Many governments privatized social services and introduced user-fees for the public provision of education and health services along with deepening credit markets to ease the access of low income households to the resources needed for their human capital formation. Yet, those attempts at financing human capital formation through out-of-pocket household expenditure adversely affected human capital investments by low-income households (Birdsall and others, 2011). Instead of enabling the economic gains created through more efficient economic organisation to reach poorer and excluded social groups, these policies effectively undermined the capacity of governments to redistribute those gains. The negative effects of this approach were increasingly visible in many middle-income countries, including vulnerable democracies where poverty and inequality were on the rise. (Solt 2008; Bonica and others. 2013). 
Public expenditure patterns since 2000
The failures and the adverse social impact of public expenditure cuts prepared the way for a different approach reflected in the adoption of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by the UN General Assembly in September 2000. By placing extreme poverty reduction and several major education and health-related objectives at the heart of the development agenda, the international community acknowledged the key role of public social spending to foster human and economic development. In the wake of the MDGs, education and health became priority areas for public expenditure. The MDG agenda also promoted the introduction of social protection, especially in the form of highly targeted conditional and non-conditional cash transfers, which currently benefit around 850 million people and positively contribute to reduce income poverty and inequality (Cornia, 2012). 
Box IV.1: Simulating public spending for reducing income inequality
Policymakers have stepped up public spending in developing countries to enhance service delivery in education, health, and sanitation, including investments in infrastructure to do so, aiming at the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Vast progress towards the MDGs has been made (United Nations, 2013). There is solid evidence that transfers to poor households have contributed to reducing income inequality in Latin America (LÛpez-Calva and Lustig, 2010). Some transfer programmes have also proven successful in achieving the long-term goals of poverty and inequality reduction, such as Zero Hunger in Brazil (Graciano da Silva, del Grossi, and Galv‚o de FranÁa, 2011). Conditional cash transfers well targeted to poor households have raised consumption levels and have reduced poverty (Fiszbein and Schady, 2011).
Simulation-based analyses for seven Latin American countries show that cash transfers are the most effective mechanism to offset the effects of adverse external shocks on poverty and inequality, amongst other alternative policy tools (Cicowiez and S·nchez, 2011). Two hypothetical cash transfer programmes for households whose income per capita was below the national poverty line are evaluated: those with at least one child at the age to attend primary school or alternatively those with one or more persons aged 65 or older who do not possess a contributory pension scheme. These transfers were found to unambiguously reduce income inequality?as measured by the Gini coefficient of income per capita - after accounting for the economy-wide effects that are triggered when the government finances the transfers and the households that receive the transfer increase their final consumption and/or savings. (see Figure IV.8). These results underscore the evidence that cash transfer programmes are effective for reducing extreme poverty as well as income inequality.
However, the fiscal sustainability of such programmes needs to be considered. It will largely depend on the extent to which governments are able to finance them and overcome fiscal constraints, requiring sustained economic growth. The feasibility of maintaining these transfers over a prolonged period of time will also depend on their cost-effectiveness. Figure IV.8 also shows that for cash transfer programmes representing one per cent of GDP, their effectiveness to reduce income inequality can vary from country to country. The allocation criterion matters greatly: education transfers are found to be more cost-effective compared to transfers to the elderly because they tend to affect the poorest deciles of the income distribution. Countries where these education programmes are not as widespread (such as in Guatemala) would gain relatively more per US dollar spent in providing cash transfers to poor households.
    Headway towards the MDGs does not seem to have been accompanied by significant reduction of income inequality, excluding perhaps in Latin American countries in recent years. Simulation results from 18 Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) country studies (S·nchez, Vos, Ganuza, Lofgren, and DÌaz-Bonilla 2010), and from 9 countries from Africa, Asia and the Middle East (S·nchez and Vos 2013), suggests that it is more realistic to expect income inequality to fall as a result of social spending policies in the long term, rather than in the shorter term. 
    These studies estimate that all 27 countries but two (Chile and Cuba) would have to increase public social spending in order to meet, by 2015, a set of MDG targets for primary school completion, reduction of child and maternal mortality, and expanded coverage of drinking water and sanitation. In ten country cases the additional public spending required would have to be as large as around 5 to almost 10 percentage points of GDP. The simulations show that, even with such demand push from public social spending, income inequality, in most cases shows very small variations, and the impact can be even ambiguous in terms of the direction of the change. Three explanations for the rather small changes in income inequality are distilled from the simulations.
    Firstly, the simulated demand push from scaling up public spending to meet MDG targets by 2015 yields meagre employment creation during a period of around 10 years, which is expected to have fairly small repercussion for income inequality. This is in part explained by the macroeconomic effects taking place in response to the increase and financing of new public social spendingóprovided other policies are not implemented to offset them. Initially, there is new additional spending in non-tradable sectors, as service delivery and related investments in education, health, and water and sanitation are scaled up. This may result in an erosion of export competitiveness and job losses in labour-intensive export sectors, thus offsetting some of the employment creation in non-tradable sectors. Furthermore, the source of financing the new spending may have specific macroeconomic implications. The use of foreign-financing sources, for example, can exacerbate the appreciation of the real exchange rate, further penalizing employment in labour-intensive export sectors. The use of domestic sources of financing such as borrowing or taxation, on the other hand, can depress private disposable incomes and therewith aggregate domestic demand. The crowding out of private consumption and investment, in turn, depresses GDP growth and employment creation. In either case, the macroeconomic trade-offs offset an increase in employment in social sectors such that total employment does not change much.
    Secondly, part of the reason why income inequality may change only modestly lies on the adjustment of the labour market per se. The increase in public social spending is expected to raise both the demand for and supply of skilled workers. One should, however, expect a timing disparity: the demand for medical personnel, doctors, teachers and other highly qualified workers will go up first, whereas the increase in the supply of skilled workers would materialize with a lag, given that such skilled workers are generally in limited supply and it will take time before the better-educated school graduates enter the labour market. This time lag is then another, complementary explanation behind the meagre employment creation in the short- to medium-term. Furthermore, given this time lag, and considering that the highly-demanded skilled workers are generally in limited supply, the wage of these workers can even rise relative to that of lower skilled workers. This shift towards greater employment opportunities for skilled workers could initially push up income inequality?as observed to be the case for some of the countries. Most of the inequality-reducing effects of investments in human development will be observed in the long term, once the better-educated school graduates enter the labour market and earn additional incomes. The length of time which this will take is an empirical question which will differ across countries.
    Thirdly, the country studies simulate an increase in public spending in education, health, and water and sanitation to meet MDG targets during a period from around 2005 to 2015. Enough time has elapsed for these countries to observe the expected increase in the supply of skilled labour with more visible consequences for both employment and income inequality. In fact, the country studies observe that for most of the countries, particularly those of the LAC region, the growth of the supply of skilled workers may already be outpacing that of unskilled workers, as a result of the progress that has been made in improving access to education during the past two decades. The problem is that production technologies in most sectors of the economies have remained fairly intensive in the use of semi-skilled and unskilled labour. In other words, these countriesí economies have not yet been able to absorb fully the growing numbers of skilled workers, thus keeping the better-educated school graduates from finding a job in the appropriate skill segments of the labour marketówith the consequence that income inequality does not fall as expected. This incapacity of the economies to absorb the increased stock of skilled workers seems to have been diminishing only recently in Latin America where important investments in education and health were made even before the MDGs were devised. As Cornia (2014) argues, investments in education over the 1990s and 2000s are among the factors explaining the recent reduction of income inequality in Latin America, and this has favoured the low-income groups. This implies that, in fact, growth of the labour supply of skilled workers in Latin America has recently been matched more commensurately by growth of the demand for these workers.
    S·nchez and Cicowiez (2013) simulate a number of scenarios in which public social spending is scaled up to meet MDG targets by 2015 but analyse its impact beyond 2015. The analysis is applied to four developing countries. The results show that GDP could experience an additional percentage point growth of 0.2-1.0 between 2016 and 2030, with important employment repercussions, owing to the delayed impact of MDG-related investments. The other key finding is that such economic gains are not larger in magnitude precisely because the economyís structure does not adjust commensurately to absorb the increased stock of better-educated workers. The supply of the most highly skilful workers increases to a point where the economy is no longer capable to absorb it. Such demand side constraints are likely to push down the skill premium, thus providing a disincentive to invest in education with adverse repercussions for the aspirations of attaining education goals. It could also further result in high rates of (youth) unemployment and pronounced skill mismatches in the labour market that may act as catalysts of underemployment. In the absence of corrective policies, these changes can potentially bear negative repercussions in terms of rising inequality of income and opportunities, persistent poverty and even social conflict.
    In sum, the simulations suggests that a critical aspect to reduce inequality in a tangible way is the ability of the countries to absorb the growth in the supply of skilled workers resulting from governmentsí efforts to pursue human development goals, especially in education. Existing economic growth patterns of developing countries do not appear sufficiently skill-intensive. The major policy challenge is to identify interventions that stimulate a structural and transformative change in the economy towards technologies and activities that can absorb larger numbers amounts of skilled workers labour, thus enabling more inclusive economic growth. 
The inflexion in public social spending observed since the turn of the Millennium has its limitations, however. In many developing regions, public expenditure as a share of GDP is still below its level in the 1980s. The scope for budget reallocation is thus strictly constrained. Furthermore, public social spending in developing countries has not increased faster than in developed countries, where public social spending represents about 25 per cent of GDP, 3 to 4 times more than in developing countries, where it hovered between 6.3 per cent of GDP in transition economies and 9.1 per cent of GDP in Latin America.
Between 2000 and 2010, public spending on education and health were on the rise (figure IV.9), despite the effects of the global financial crisis. Public spending on education increased in most developing regions, including in sub-Saharan Africa and especially Latin America, where countries such as Argentina, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Columbia, Cuba, Ecuador, Mexico and Nicaragua all registered significant increases in public education spending. By contrast, public education spending decreased by up to 1 per cent of GDP in North Africa, Western Asia, Southern Asia as well as Melanesia. In general, this decline in the wake of the global financial crisis also hints at the enduring pro-cyclical nature of public social spending that derives from the resource-constrained approach prevailing in some sub-regions, especially in Southern Asia (Sobhan, 2010). In developed countries, public spending on education increased modestly since 2000, especially in Northern and Eastern Europe (after a sharp decline in the latter during the 1990s), but rising income and wealth inequality and youth unemployment hint at the weak potential of policies that focus exclusively on human development. 
Differences in social spending between developing and developed countries are even more pronounced with regard to health than education. Public spending on health remains significantly higher in developed countries and expanded at a faster pace between 2000 and 2010, absorbing the majority of the increase in social spending in all developed sub-regions. Public health spending growth in developed countries is driven by ageing, but also by rising costs/corporate profits, especially in countries most reliant on private supply of health services. However, compared to developing countries, households tend to bear a smaller share of total health costs, except in Northern America (figure IV.10). In 2010, public health expenditure covered between 70 per cent and 85 per cent of total health expenditure in most developed countries, with notable exceptions. In most developing sub-regions, the majority of total health costs are borne by private households. In Southern Asia, the private share in total health costs was as high as 70 per cent in 2010. Growing public spending on health over the last decade, however, slightly alleviated this burden across most developing sub-regions.
Since 2000, social protection expenditures represented 14.3 per cent of GDP of developed countries, but only ranged between 1.6 and 3.9 per cent of GDP in developing countries (table IV.1). In developed countries, pensions absorb about 75 per cent of social protection expenditure. Over the last decades, rising expenditure on pensions through contributory and especially non-contributory programmes put an end to extreme poverty among elderly, which was widespread 50 years ago. The substantial resources allocated to social protection in developed countries ensure decent quality and coverage, but gender blindness in pension and other social protection programmes keep implicitly discriminating against women (Razavi et al. 2012).
In Latin America, governments since 2000 facilitated the progressive move towards a more rights-based approach to social spending, including social protection. Consequently, Latin America has become the developing region that spends most on social protection and registered a steady and significant decline in poverty and income inequality since 2000. A rights-based approach to social protection aims at providing broad social protection against significant risks, improving access to social transfers for those in need, and greater provision of public goods and services with the same quality standards for all social groups. Entitlements are based on citizenship, with a minimum of discretionary authority on the part of the agencies concerned. 
This approach has shaped a number of new initiatives, such as a universal child allowance in Argentina, a universal old-age pension in Bolivia, and an old-age pension, and disability, sickness and maternity benefits in Brazil (ILO, 2010 and 2012). In parallel, key instruments of social policy for poverty alleviation and redistribution, including conditional cash transfers (CCTs), have been introduced in a number of countries. Non-contributory expenditures on social assistance in general, and CCTs in particular, appear to have been quite effective in protecting the poorest segments of society (Lindert, Skoufias and Shapiro, 2006; Cornia 2012), making the overall effects of redistributive policies more progressive. 
In other regions, many countries have made limited progress in deploying social protection. In several transition economies of Central Asia, recent social transfer schemes have not been particularly effective in addressing the needs of poor households owing to their limited coverage and funding. Universal social welfare policies and transfer programmes inherited from the former Soviet Union are often poorly designed and not well funded, which means that meagre resources for social pensions are spread thinly over a large population (Gassmann, 2011). In the rest of Asia, CCT programmes targeting various categories of individuals, including elderly people, children and extreme poor have been implemented in urban and rural areas. Efforts to improve the livelihood of the poor were often accompanied by investments in infrastructure (transport, water and electricity, health and education) in urban and rural areas (ADB 2008, 2012). 
In India, centralized implementation of social protection programmes mostly failed to satisfactorily reduce poverty or inequality (Nagaraj, 2012). Flexible schemes implemented at a lower level of government with greater participatory and political oversight delivered contrasting outcomes. Kerala and West Bengal, for instance, are the two States experiencing most success at reducing poverty and inequality. Underlying this achievement are complex historical roots, including the political mobilization of lower castes and classes. This broadened political base has facilitated the implementation of a variety of pro-poor public policies, including land tenancy reforms, higher investments in and better implementation of education and health policies, along with greater gender equality (UNRISD 2010). 
In China, the accelerated modernization of economy has been accompanied by increased migration from rural areas. The inadequacy of the hukou system, disallowing temporary migrant workers access to public services, facilitated the emergence of urban poverty starting in the mid-1990s, which has imperfectly been addressed through reform of the social security system. Work-related social insurance programmes, in particular for urban residents, were redesigned. The coverage of the Minimum Living Standard Guarantee System has been growing since the late 1990s, particularly in the coastal areas, but a significant proportion of the eligible population remains uncovered in the western and central provinces. However, some local governments significantly expanded social protection, including subsidized housing for peasant migrant workers, thus reducing poverty and inequality in their region (Huang, 2011, 2012).
In most sub-Saharan African countries, social protection was close to non-existent until recently (Palacios and PallarÈs-Millares, 2000). In the 2000s, several countries introduced social protection programs targeting elderly people, children and the extreme poor, but the coverage, quality and level of assistance is often insufficient (Barrientos et al. 2010, NiÒo-Zaraz˙a et al., 2012). Several programmes in Central, East and West Africa are financed largely by official development assistance (ODA) and in many cases reflect the influence of international organizations and changing donor priorities shifting their support from emergency and humanitarian aid to social protection. 
In summary, the MDG agenda represented a positive step towards rehabilitating progressive redistribution. Yet, the lack of sufficient resources for social spending across most developing regions, its pro-cyclicality and vulnerability to exogenous factors in combination with enduring poverty and rising inequality also clearly highlight a major limitation of the current approach. By focusing on raising public social spending, but neglecting to raise sufficient revenues through progressive income and wealth taxation, most countries failed to provide redistributive policies with a solid backbone. The next section examines public revenue mobilization during the recent decades.
END BOX
Public revenue mobilization
In developed countries, tax reforms led to a substantial decline in tax revenue and to more regressive tax structures, shifting the tax base away from progressive wealth and income taxes, especially capital income taxes, towards consumption taxes which are often penalizing lower income households. 
Such reforms also found an echo in developing countries, where international donors and institutions, including the IMF and the World Bank, encouraged governments through policy recommendations and lending conditionality to embrace the same approach.  In the wake of trade liberalization, tax reform in developing countries often emphasized consumption taxes as a means to replace declining trade tax revenue, with mixed results, especially in low-income countries (Baunsgaard and Keen 2010). The creation of semi-autonomous revenue agencies (SARAs) focusing on value-added taxes allowed to rapidly raise revenue in some developing countries, but they failed to do so in a progressive manner and further locked-in administrative structures that were not conducive to the development of modern integrated public administrations, required for state-building and to foster sustainable development (Fjeldstad and Moore 2009, Prichard 2010). 
In the meanwhile, the enduring weakness of tax administrations is reflected in the continuous dependence on ODA in many countries and the resource-constrained approach to public social spending. This reflects the inability of tax authorities of least developed, developing and developed countries to tax the high-net wealth individuals as well as corporations according to their ability to pay and raise sufficient revenue to advance towards sustainable development objectives, as agreed in the Monterrey consensus and ratified in the Doha declaration.
Total revenue, including non-tax revenue from natural resources 
As noted above, throughout the 1980s and 1990s, total government expenditure (as a share of GDP) declined hand in hand with reduced mobilization of revenues. Comparability of public revenue data for developing countries are hardly available prior to 1990. Table IV.2 captures the trend in total revenue which declined until the end of the 1990s across most regions before picking up in the early 2000s. In developed countries, total revenue at the end of the 2010 remained below its level 20 years earlier. Despite this decline, total revenue in developed countries amounted to 41.3 per cent of GDP on average in 2010, up to twice as much as in some other regions. 
In developing regions such as Africa, Latin America, Western Asia and in transition economies, rising total revenue over the decade 2000 to 2010 substantially resulted from growing other (non-tax) revenue. These derived from higher commodity prices, improved terms of trade, increased exploitation of natural resources, as well as from deliberate policies aiming at appropriating a larger share of the oil and mineral earnings for government. Western Asia has long been deriving a majority of its revenue from oil exports, but Africa registered the largest increase in other (non-tax) revenue over the most recent decade, which rose on average by 3.6 per cent to 9.1 per cent of GDP by 2010, amounting to almost a third of total revenue and grants.
The exploitation of natural resources generates revenues accruing to governments in the form of either profit of (partly) state-owned enterprises or royalties and taxes paid by private companies. Rapidly growing demand from international markets and rising commodity prices over the last decade accelerated the exploitation of natural resources, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, where the share of the mining and oil sector now weighs more than half of GDP in Angola, the Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and Mauritania and more than 25 percent in 9 countries. (Cornia, 2013). The most common range for royalty rates is around 5 per cent to 10 per cent, but rates were often well below that common range in a number of African countries in previous decades (Baunsgaard, 2001). This highlights the extent to which natural resource rents are privatized. 
Revenue composition and tax schedules
Tax revenue as a share of GDP in most developing regions presently stands at almost half the level prevailing in developed countries. As noted by the G20, about half of sub-Saharan African countries still mobilize less than 17 per cent of their GDP in tax revenue (G20 2011). As reported in Table IV.2, tax revenue as a share of GDP remain below 20 per cent in many Asian and Latin American countries, reflecting widespread subsistence production, large informal sectors and weak administrative capacity.  Furthermore, interest groups and political economy pressures sought to stabilize the level and composition of tax revenue and keep tax schedules regressive.
The ratio of direct to indirect tax revenue (reported in Table IV.2) is a useful though imperfect indicator of the progressivity of tax systems or the lack thereof. Over the last decades, this ratio steadily declined in developed countries and in transition economies, driven by increasingly regressive tax structures. In OECD countries, top marginal personal and corporate income tax rates decreased on average by about 20 per cent in OECD countries between 1980 and 2012, while the average value-added tax rate increased by about 8 per cent (figure IV.11).
In Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, many countries increased indirect taxes while adopting flat personal and corporate income tax rates to strengthen profit incentives and attract foreign direct investments (see table IV.4). Flat income tax rates represent the least progressive form of direct income taxation and rejects the notion of vertical equality (i.e., higher income implies higher taxes rates). While Baltic countries retained the highest pre-reform flat tax rates in the range of 25-33 per cent and increased the no-tax area (thus making the tax schedule comparatively progressive), other countries adopted very low flat tax rates in the range of 10 to 16 per cent. 
By contrast, the ratio of direct to indirect tax revenue slightly increased in developing regions. This increase was mainly driven by corporate income tax revenue, which rose by about 1 per cent of GDP across all regions over the last 2 decades, a moderate increase given the significant expansion of the private sector in many countries during that period. Overall, indirect taxes are used so extensively that they still represent the main source of government revenue, and direct tax revenue continues to represent only a fraction of the indirect tax revenue across all developing regions and in transition economies (table 2). 
Steps towards more progressive tax systems 
The progressive or regressive nature of tax systems, however, relies on a multitude of factors that are imperfectly captured by the ratio of direct to indirect tax revenue. Some countries have taken progressive steps during the last decade, especially in Latin America. The new approach in that region was inspired by the search for greater tax equity and the principle of fiscal exchange, according to which governments can raise taxes if, at the same time, they raise they quantity and quality of services provided to a broad spectrum of the population (Cornia, 2014). 
In Latin America, for instance, value-added tax rates were mostly left unchanged, but excises on luxury goods were increased in some countries. Many countries placed more emphasis on progressive income taxation. For instance, the 2007 Uruguayan tax reform introduced ex-novo a progressive personal income tax, but only a flat corporate income tax. Other countries introduced a minimum tax on firms to strengthen the collection of corporate income tax (e.g. Mexico) or lowered the income per capita at which the highest direct marginal tax rate is applied. Most governments eliminated a long list of exemptions, deductions and tax holidays benefiting transnational corporations (TNCs), which had been introduced in the 1980s and 1990s to attract foreign investments. Presumptive taxation was also strengthened due to the inability of the tax administration to ascertain the assets and income of potential taxpayers, and was levied on an estimate of the person/firmís income made by the tax authorities on the basis of objective indicators of gross turnover (e.g. assets, number of employees, electricity consumption). The strengthening of presumptive taxation was accompanied by a simplification of taxation of self-employed taxpayers. For instance, in 1998 Argentina tax authorities integrated social security payments, income tax, minimum tax on assets and value-added tax. Several Latin American countries further introduced a surrogate tax on financial transactions yielding 0.3 to 1.9 per cent of GDP. 
Environmental taxation fostering sustainable use of natural resources 
Policy makers should consider the potential of redistributive taxation to promote environmental sustainability.  In most countries, environmental taxes are closely tied to carbon sources, such as energy and vehicles. However, they remain insignificant in many countries, including in developed countries with high carbon emissions. At the same time, energy subsidies significantly subsidize the production and consumption of fossil fuels in many countries, amounting to global expense of $1.9 trillion in 2011, the equivalent of 2.5 per cent of global GDP, or 8 per cent of government revenue (IMF 2013b). Higher environmental tax revenue is consistently associated with lower carbon emissions across countries (figure IV.11). Hence, a rise in environmental taxes and a decline in fossil fuel subsidies could foster more sustainable use of natural resources and help curbing negative externalities, including those associated with spatially fragmented global value chains. 
The regressive impact of higher flat indirect environmental taxes targeting consumption could potentially lock the poorest out of markets and deprive them from access to energy and other goods likely to be subject to elevated environmental taxes. Governments could consider the implementation of progressive taxes related to individual consumption of some goods and services that are particularly harmful to the environment, such as airline flights (e.g., tax on plane tickets instead of frequent flyers reward programmes) or secondary residences (Casal 2012). 
Equitable access to natural resources rents could be fostered by the progressive redistribution of proceeds of publicly owned natural resources. For instance,  in Norway corporate profits in the oil sector are taxed at a rate of 78 per cent. Norwayís $840 billion public Oil Fund, which owns on average 1.3 per cent of all listed companies, appointed a group of experts to examine whether the best strategy to address climate change is to divest from fossil fuel extraction or to define responsible criteria for exclusions (Financial Times, 28 February 2014). Raising environmental taxes and identifying new ways to offset their regressive impact through redistributive mechanisms may become a prominent policy concerns in developed and developing countries in the years ahead.
Environmental tax revenue in developed and developing countries
Several Latin American countries, such as Brazil, Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic significantly increased environmental tax revenue between 2000 and 2011, collecting revenue in excess of 1.6 per cent of GDP, the OECD average in 2011 (figure IV.12). Other developing countries, including China, also made progress during the last decade, but still collect little revenue. Rather disconcertingly, environmental tax revenue declined in most OECD countries, including those with highest carbon emissions, such as the United States, Canada, New Zealand or Australia. This was mainly due to the failure of policy-makers to index tax rates and keep up with inflation. Several European countries have created carbon taxes and the United Kingdom has labelled it a ìclimate change levyî. These taxes, however, have to date yielded little revenue, not so much because of their deterring effect on carbon emitters, but because of the very low tax rates imposed on carbon externalities.
Some countries refrain from levying more significant environmental taxes to avoid dealing with their redistributive implications. Furthermore, exemptions are often granted to energy-intensive industrial sectors to foster their international competitiveness (OECD 2006, 2010). Instead of being subject to taxes which redistribute revenue from the private to the public sector, corporations have increasingly been subjected to market-based solutions, such as cap-and-trade or emissions trading systems (ETS) and offsetting mechanisms; the latter redistribute revenue among corporations only. The Kyoto Protocol laid the foundation for implementing these solutions globally, but only a minority of countries have committed to binding carbon emissions reduction targets. Furthermore, the excess supply of allowances   in emission permits to countries and corporations has kept carbon pricing well below $50 per ton, which is considered by many climate experts as a minimum for enabling structural economic transformations required for a transition towards a sustainable development path. For instance, in the oldest and largest ETS established by the European Union in 2005, carbon prices mostly hovered between Ä10 and Ä15 during the last 5 years, and even collapsed to Ä3 in early 2013. The present situation is that most environmental taxes are levied in a manner which weights mostly on households rather than corporations; hence the incentives of the latter are only weakly affected by environmental redistributive policies.
Net wealth taxes 
The base of net wealth taxes encompasses all forms of capital, including financial capital concentrated in the top centile. Net wealth best reflects the ability to pay of individuals, which is generally considered to be a founding principle of tax collection, and it further represents a considerable potential source of revenue given that the value of accumulated capital stock is worth several times that of GDP in most countries (see capital stock to GDP ratios in figure IV.6). Consequently, net wealth taxation is conducive for reducing inequality of outcome and enhancing equality of opportunity. Yet, as reported in the IMF Fiscal Monitor (2013) offering a brief survey of wealth taxes in general, only two countries in the OECD impose recurrent net wealth taxes generating more than 1 per cent of GDP (Luxembourg and Switzerland) (figure IV.14). Furthermore, many countries never established wealth taxes or abolished them over the last 15 years.  Iceland and Spain reintroduced them in the wake of the financial crisis, but overall net wealth taxes are either very low or non-existent. The OECD study also illustrates the extent to which capital gains taxes benefit from exemptions. This may need to be revisited in light of the global financial crisis and increasing inequality. (OECD, 2009 see in particular Annex D).
Meanwhile, immovable property has become the main base for wealth taxation in developed as well as in some developing countries (Norregaard 2013) and recurrent property taxes account for the bulk of wealth tax revenue (figure IV.15). Revenue generated by taxes on land and residential property is most significant in Anglo-Saxon countries, where it almost accounts for the totality of wealth tax revenue. Property tax revenue generally accrues to local authorities using it to fund local public goods, which is often viewed as improving governance and accountability (IMF 2013). However, with the growing spatial segregation reinforcing the clustering of communities according to their income level, the use of property tax revenue to fund local public goods also limits their progressivity. Indeed, in presence of spatial segregation along income lines, the border between public goods available to all social groups and club goods available only to selected affluent groups is becoming a challenge. Furthermore, the extent to which effective incidence of property taxes weighs on owners remains a matter of ongoing research (Norregaard 2013).
Other wealth tax revenues arise from various sources, including inheritance, gift and estate taxes.  The bulk of other wealth tax revenue arises from taxes on financial and capital transactions, including various taxes on property sales as well as financial transaction taxes (FTT). Proponents of the FTT view it as a kind of value-added tax on financial consumption, which could rein in financial speculation, rather than as a genuine wealth tax. FTT are in place in many countries, though at levels which are very modest as compared to regular value-added taxes. Yet, its opponents argue that the FTT is detrimental to actors engaging in financial transactions as well as to overall economic efficiency. Nonetheless, in the wake of the global financial crisis, the idea of introducing an EU-wide FTT resurfaced. In December 2012, 11 members of the EU, including Germany, France, Italy and Spain, adopted a plan for a FTT, which would seek to rein in speculative capital transactions and encourage the financial sector to engage in more responsible transactions geared towards the real economy. It is anticipated to raise about 35 billion euro in tax revenue every year. However, no final agreement has been reached to date on the details of this plan and financial interests remain strongly opposed to its implementation.

Towards redistributive policy frameworks enabling sustainable development
The redistributive policies and trends described in the previous section are characterised by a resource-constrained approach to public goods provision, regressive revenue mobilization weighting increasingly on consumption instead of top incomes. Overall, this approach resulted in weaker redistribution, mild poverty alleviation, rising income inequality, widespread tax avoidance, increased wealth concentration and rising global carbon emissions. In this context, renewed thinking about opportunities to foster redistributive institutions and policies through domestic reforms and international cooperation is required in order to advance towards an alternative framework enabling redistributive policies for equity and sustainable development.
In many developing countries, revenue mobilization is still below the minimum level of 20 per cent of GDP that was been suggested as necessary to achieve the Millennium Development Goals (UNDP 2010). Significant additional efforts are likely to be required for the post-2015 sustainable development agenda if it is to aim at fully eradicating extreme poverty and at addressing salient social and environmental challenges, such as high income inequality and the breach of planetary boundaries. 
Modernizing tax administration for progressive tax revenue mobilization  
Increased and progressive mobilization of tax revenue is highly desirable, but some developing and least developed countries with large rural and informal sectors still lack the administrative capacity to levy progressive taxes. It first requires building competent tax administrations able to handle complex information and create registers of property and wealth, which is key for progressive tax collection as well as economic analysis and planning (Chaudhry 1997). Such efforts can further act as a catalyst for demands for greater accountability, transparency and better governance, which would strengthen the role of civil society and state-building (Prichard 2009, Joshi et al. 2012). Technical assistance and capacity development in tax administration is key for reducing dependence on ODA in the longer term.
Tax reform should make tax systems less regressive. This requires shifting the tax base away from consumption and low incomes towards higher incomes, especially capital rents derived from financial wealth (Piketty 2013, Wˆhlbier et al. 2014). Indirect taxes represent the major source of revenue in many developing countries (see Table IV.2 above). Taxes on labour income are often described as discouraging job creation, but high marginal tax rates fulfil the essential role of deterring excessive compensation that has contributed to high income shares of the top 1 per cent (figure IV.3). It is also urgent to close loopholes and exemptions that erode the tax base and significantly depress the effective tax rate imposed on capital income and to combat tax evasion in ways that effectively reduce opportunities for HNWIs and TNCs to declare fiscal incomes and profits which represent only a fraction of their economic income (see also chapter V). 
Shifting the tax base to include wealth 
Wealth best reflects the ability to pay of individual, which is a founding principle of taxation. In most countries, capital stock often represents a multiple of annual income flows (GDP), representing a significant untapped tax base.  As wealth is highly concentrated in all countries, including developed countries with more egalitarian wealth distribution (figure IV.6), a significant part of total capital incomes accrue  to the top 10 or top 1 percent of income recipients.
Higher wealth taxes (including inheritance taxes) are conducive for enhancing equality of opportunity and social mobility. In addition, wealth taxes have the virtue of encouraging work income over rent income and to incentivize capital owners to make productive investments, which will need to be stepped up significantly for achieving structural economic transformations that are called for the in the post-2015 discussions.
Wealth taxes currently mainly target immobile capital through residential property taxes. Yet, extreme wealth is mainly accumulated in financial assets, which are often wrapped in opaque ownership structures hidden in tax havens and off-shore financial centres offering secrecy, out of reach of domestic tax administrations. Part of the targeted tax base will escape their authority in absence of an internationally coordinated action. As opportunities for tax evasion remain abundant, some economists have stressed the advantages of imposing a one-off wealth levy, whose costs to some wealth owners may be less than the cost of relocating (Bach et al. 2011, Bach 2012, Eichengreen 1991). Given the technical feasibility of implementing a capital income and wealth taxes at the domestic or at the global level in presence of financial transparency, priority should be given to overcoming existing political obstacles in the medium term. Ongoing initiatives for the automatic exchange of information and creating registries disclosing beneficial ownership of trusts and other shell structures (chapter 5) are thus key for enabling governments to use wealth taxation for investment in sustainable development.
According to some estimates, imposing a 1 per cent tax on the net wealth of the richest decile could raise tax revenue amounting to one per cent of GDP in many countries. Given the very high concentration of wealth, simply raising this rate to 2 per cent on the richest centile would already double the revenue raised (IMF, 2013). A domestic or global annual tax could be imposed on financial capital above a certain threshold to contain the expansion of extreme wealth (Piketty, 2013).
Shifting the tax base towards environmental externalities 
The tax base should also decisively shift towards environmental externalities, especially carbon emissions in polluting industries, without depriving the poor from access to energy and other markets. Such a shift would strengthen incentives for the significant transformations in production structures and consumption behavior that are desirable in developed countries as well as developing countries.
To alleviate the burden on poorer households, efforts should be made to levy progressive environmental taxes tied to individual consumption of some luxury goods and services that are particularly harmful to the environment. Some of them would be easy to implement, such as taxes on flights (e.g., tax on plane tickets instead of frequent flyer reward programmes) or on secondary residences. Equitable access to benefits arising from natural resources could be fostered by the progressive redistribution of environmental tax revenue as well as of proceeds of natural resource rents. 
Ways to implement higher carbon taxes should be investigated so as to promote sustainable value chains and reduce polluting international merchandise transport, which already accounts for around 7 per cent of global carbon emissions (Cristea et al. 2013, WESP 2013). Higher taxes could send clearer and steadier signals across the economy and to generate revenue that can be recycled to achieve distributional objectives.
Investing in people: a rights-based approach to human development
Increased and progressive revenue mobilization is desirable for enabling a rights-based approach considering human development as a fundamental right. The MDGs contributed to draw attention on the central role of human capital formation as a determinant of income poverty and slow economic development. Increased public social spending improved access to education and health services, and social protection programmes further shielded some of the most vulnerable social groups from extreme poverty, but the prevailing approach to human development in many countries remains resource-constrained. This particularly affects the coverage and quality of social protection programmes, which still partly exclude or discriminate against vulnerable social groups least integrated in formal employment structures, such as elderly people or women (Razavi 2011, Razavi and Cook 2012). Increased revenue mobilization may facilitate a gradual transition towards a rights-based approach and progressing towards sustainable development objectives.
Conditions for implementing wealth transfers between social groups or between the private and public sectors will always be country-specific, but such transfers may need to be considered in highly unequal societies for promoting greater equity and achieving sustainable development. Redistributing land property or tenancy rights to small farmers, for instance, can reduce income poverty and inequality in a sustained manner and is further conducive to the use of more sustainable agricultural methods. Corporate ownership and governance structures involving a diversity of stakeholders, such as cooperatives, can also foster the pursuit of collective interests. 

Chapter V: The Global Dimension
Introduction
Income distribution is much more unequal across the global economy than it is within even the most unequal countries: even at purchasing power parity, the Gini coefficient for the world population as a whole (0.692) is higher than in any individual country (Milanovic, ; World Bank n.d. b). Just as inequality contributes to unsustainability at the national level, as discussed in Chapter 2, so the still greater inequality globally might be expected, through similar mechanisms, to undermine the sustainability of development as a global process.
This chapter begins by developing the framework developed in Chapter 2 for considering the inter-relationship between (in)equality and (un)sustainable development in the context of the global economy. It goes on to discuss the forces underlying inequality between and within countries at the global level, focusing on asymmetries in the international mobility of factors of production as between those of the poor and of the rich. Following a general discussion of global inequality and the challenges of financial and environmental sustainability , it addresses in greater detail the particular case of climate change, as the key challenge to development sustainability at the global level, and two key issues in relation to asymmetric factor mobility ñmigration (international immobility of labour) and international tax coordination (in response to hyper-mobility of finance). The Chapter concludes with a discussion of global decision-making processes as the key linkage in a vicious circle of economic and political inequality, undermining effective action to address sustainable development challenges, at the global level.
Framework
Sustainable Development as a Global Process
Development is conventionally viewed as a process which occurs within a sub-set of distinct (low- and middle-income) national economies. In an increasing integrated global economy, however, this is increasingly problematic. Particularly over the last 30 years, the room for manoeuvre of developing country governments has become increasingly constrained by external factors. This has occurred both directly, through IMF, World Bank and donor conditionalities, multilateral and bilateral agreements on trade and investment, etc; and indirectly, through the constraints imposed by reliance on, and exposure to, global financial and goods markets, and the need to maintain international competitiveness, attract foreign investment, and integrate into global value chains).
The progressive integration of global markets has thus given rise to an increasing duality in the nature of development, between the set of national development processes in developing countries, and a broader global development process of which they form a part. This has been further intensified by the increasingly global scope of communications and logistics facilitated by the rapid development of information and communication technologies and social media.
Recent decades have also seen a parallel shift in environmental issues, from the local to the global level. Forty years ago, the environmental issues of primary concern were land, air and water pollution. These are essentially localised in nature: environmental impacts are to a geographically focused near to the locations of the economic activities which gave rise to them. Over recent decades, however, a number of global environmental issues have assumed a growing importance. These are characterised by at most a much weaker connection between the location of an economic activity (and still more the location of the production and consumption decisions which give rise to it), and the location of its environmental impacts. 
The clearest and most pressing example is climate change, which is intrinsically global in nature: the climatic changes caused by increasing carbon emissions do not affect the climate in the location where they occur any more than anywhere else. Rather it is total global emissions which impact on the global climate. There are considerable variations in local impacts, but these are wholly unrelated to local carbon emissions. 
Thus sustainability is increasingly a global phenomenon, and no longer exclusively a national or local one. Except perhaps for the very largest countries, national carbon emissions do not materially affect whether a national development process can be sustained, because they do no impact significantly on the countryís own climate (although there may be other local impacts, for example on air quality). Rather, it is total global of emissions which render the global process of development sustainable or unsustainable. This dimension of sustainability can thus only coherently be considered in relation to the global development process.
Financial and economic sustainability has also become an increasingly global phenomenon, particularly through the global integration of financial markets. This is amply demonstrated by the increasing frequency and severity of international financial crises since the 1980s (the Latin American and low-income country debt crises from 1982, the Asian crisis of 1997, and the current crisis, beginning in 2007), the increasing scope of their contagion effects, and the role of speculative investment in the food price crisis of 2007-8 and 2011-12. The result, highlighted by the effects of the current financial crisis, is to pose a threat to the financial sustainability of development at the global level, distinct and separate from any threat which might arise from policies or performance at the national level (IMF, 2013b, Chapter 3). National economic policy and performance still plays a major role; but, at times of crisis, synchronised movements of capital occur between economies on an unprecedented scale, posing a serious risk to financial stability for reasons wholly beyond the control of national governments.
Global Linkages between Inequality and Sustainability
The global linkages between inequality and sustainability relate partly to the international channel described in Chapter 2. In the context of global sustainability, however, the global aspects of individual and national channels are also critical. 
In relation to the national channel, the key issue globally is the effects of between-country inequality on national policies. In relation to the individual channel, the global income distribution is, by definition,  an amalgamation of national distributions, but substantially more unequal, owing to the combination of between- and within-country inequality.
Within high-income countries, the main threat to sustainability arises from over-consumption; in low-income economies it arises from unsustainable patterns of production (eg land use) and consumption (eg energy sources) driven by extreme poverty. The global income distribution, however, encompasses both, so that reducing inequality simultaneously reduces the threat to sustainability from over-consumption and that from extreme poverty. This suggests that the potential benefits to sustainability are greater, in principle, than within either high- or low-income countries, where only one of these effects will be significant.
Just as inequality of influence between rich and poor people is a key issue within countries, so is that of inequality of influence between higher- and lower-income countries globally. However, there is also an additional dimension, as the interests of individual countries are mediated by representatives or delegates selected by (and, to a greater or lesser extent, accountable to) national governments. Thus, skewed power relationships within countries (both developed and developing) also result in the interests of poorer people being under-represented relative to the better-off and commercial and financial interests internationally. Thus, the influence of the global poor in international decision-making is doubly impaired, while that of global elites is doubly enhanced.
As well as decision-making processes, as noted above, the process of commercial and financial globalisation has greatly increased exposure to global market forces. More open national financial markets and globalised finance have increased vulnerability to market sentiment. Growing reliance on foreign direct investment (FDI) has intensified the need for favourable perceptions among transnational companies (TNCs). Outward-oriented development strategies have both increased reliance on international markets for commodity exports (and imports, notably of basic foods and fuel, and of intermediate goods required for export production) and strengthened the need to maintain international competitiveness.
This exposure to international markets gives rise to constraints on national policies, above and beyond those of international institutions and rules themselves, limiting the scope for policies to mitigate inequality and increase environmental sustainability. The increasing mobility of financial capital both constrains tax rates on financial income and deters policies which may be viewed negatively by financial markets. Reliance on FDI and participation in global value chains is a constraint both on corporate taxation and on regulation which may increase costs in the productive sector. Maintaining competitiveness may discourage labour market policies (eg minimum wages, employment protection and regulation of working hours) which could raise production costs. is substantially reduced.
The potential threat to sustainability from all these channels has increased over recent decades, as exposure to international markets has increased in parallel with global inequality. Together with the increasing importance of global environmental issues, particularly climate change, this has also greatly increased the potential impact of international decision-making.
Global Forces towards Increased Inequality
Key determinants of income distribution at the global level are access to different factors of production and their relative returns. Households at the top of the global income distribution are there largely by virtue of their ownership of substantial amounts of capital; and the global distribution of wealth is still more concentrated than that of income (Davies et al, 2008). Those with high-level human capital (eg tertiary education) are also generally in the upper part of the global income distribution. Those at the bottom of the distribution typically have only unskilled labour; and at the very bottom, their productivity is often impaired by poor health and/or under-nutrition associated with poverty. Those with small amounts of land and lower-level human capital (eg artisanal skills) are typically just above the bottom.
This broad pattern in the distribution of income sources corresponds with a marked asymmetry in globalisation between factors of production: global markets are much more integrated for the factors of production of the rich than for those of the poor. 
Since the abandonment of capital controls as the basis of the international financial system in the 1970s, and particularly since the emergence of electronic technologies as a medium of exchange since the 1990s, financial capital has become highly mobile internationally. This hyper-mobility is highlighted by turnover in foreign exchange markets, which averaged growth of 13% pa between 2001 and (April) 2013, reaching $5,345 billion, some 25 times (daily) global GDP (BIS, 2013, Table 1, p9). A recent IMF study found that major episodes of opening to international capital flows in developed countries increased inequality, raising the Gini coefficient by one point in the first year, and two points after five years (Furceri and Lungani, 2013, citing Furceri et al, forthcoming).
The mobility of human capital has also increased, but much less; and global mobility of unskilled labour remains much more limited (although it is greater within some regions, most notably the European Union). Mobility of high-level human capital ñ graduates and people with professional skills - has been facilitated to some extent, for example, by the inclusion of  ìpresence of natural personsî (ie temporary migration) as a mode of trade in services in the WTO General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). However, the extent of this mobility is limited by the terms of the Agreement, which limits liberalisation to commitments made voluntarily by each individual member in specific sectors, and with limitations included at the memberís discretion. It is further limited by the explicit exclusion from the terms of the Agreement national policies on citizenship or residence (that is, immigration policies) (WTO, n.d.).
The GATS Agreement is strongly skewed towards mobility of human capital and against that of unskilled labour. It is primarily directed towards providers of professional services, and specifically excludes migrants seeking access to the employment market, as opposed to those already employed by a foreign company or seeking self-employment (WTO, n.d.). 
The evolution of migration trends reflects this asymmetry. Docquier and Marfouk (2006), for example, estimate that the number of foreign-born workers with tertiary education living in OECD countries increased by 63.7% between 1990 and 2000, compared with an increase of only 14.4% for unskilled workers. 
The omission of unskilled migration from the liberalisation of global markets leaves this as the one area in which national governments have almost complete discretion. As a result, the increasing popular opposition to inward migration following the financial crisis, coupled with the continued dependency of many developed countries on immigration to counter shortages of key skills, has led to a further tightening of overall immigration policies and increased selectivity. Within the European Union, the limited potential for tightening restrictions on migration between member countries, and the increase in such migration as result of expansion further compounds this effect: since they cannot control migration from within the EU, member states must focus their efforts to reduce migration strongly on immigration from elsewhere, primarily developing countries.
While land has similarly been a missing dimension of globalisation, there has been a considerable increase in cross-border acquisitions of land over the last decade, following the rapid increase in agricultural prices between 2002 and 2008. The Land Matrix Global Observatory, a global initiative to monitor international land purchases, has recorded 936 completed transactions, with a further 140 under negotiation, and 43 expressions of interest. The completed deals account for a total area of 58.8m hectares ñ an area slightly greater than France ñ an increase of 10% in eight months. The pending deals represent a further 14.1m hectares.  The countries with the largest areas involved are Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique, Brazil, Ukraine, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Sudan (Land Matrix, 2014, Table 1; Figure 2).
However, such deals are markedly different in nature, and therefore in implications, from capital and human capital mobility. Financial assets can be bought and sold from day to day; and migrants with highly-valued skills can in principle move between countries from year to year, according to where the returns are highest. Land deals, by contrast, generally entail binding leases extending over a period of decades. Equally, rather than a continuing stream of payment, in many cases there is only a one-off payment, which is often very low (though sometimes accompanied by support for social projects). In one case in Sudan, a 99-year lease has been granted on 179,000 hectares for just US$0.09 per hectare (US$9/km2) per year (plus support to local projects); a 99-year lease on 34,736 hectares in Tanzania has been granted for a lump-sum of $250,000, equivalent (at a discount rate of 10% pa) to an annual rent of around US$0.015 per hectare (Anseeuw et al, 2012, Table 8, p43).
This combination of systematic differences between the rich and the poor in their access to factors of production, and asymmetry in their international mobility is a key factor in global inequality. The richest are those with substantial amounts of financial capital. They are able to move their wealth between countries to seek the highest rate of return unhindered; and this limits governmentsí ability to tax their income or regulate their financial markets. Those with high-level human capital have some scope to raise their incomes by moving to countries where they can secure higher rewards. But those with only unskilled labour to offer are generally mobile only within the national markets into which they were born.
International mobility of financial and human capital has conspicuously failed to lead to economic convergence by countries at the bottom of the global income distribution. Far from flowing towards low-income and least developed countries, where they are scarcest and represent an important constraint on development, they have systematically flowed away from them, compounding the development challenge. 
While commercial capital flows to emerging markets have been substantial (though also very variable, triggering the financial crisis of 1997), little has gone to low-income and least developed countries. Many, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa, have struggled to attract even relatively limited amounts of foreign indirect investment (except in extractive industries in recent years): investors are deterred by their limited domestic markets, unfavourable economic conditions, limited infrastructure, human capital scarcity and perceptions of high levels of risk. Rather, as financial markets have opened, domestic investors have moved their capital away, exploiting the opportunities to seek better returns and lower risks elsewhere (Boyce and Ndikumana, 2011). 
A similar pattern arises in highly-skilled migration. In the US, for example, 41.8% of immigrants from Sub-Saharan Africa have at least a bachelorís degree ñ substantially higher than the proportion for the native population in the US (32.8%) ñ while only 11.9% have ìless than high schoolî education (Camarota, 2012, Table 27). By comparison, the average tertiary enrolment ratio for the region as a whole was 7.6% in 2011, and averaged just 4.4% between 1970 and 2011 (World Bank, n.d. b). 
Taking the last figure as an approximation of the overall level of tertiary education among potential migrants, this suggests that Africans with tertiary education are around 16 times more likely to migrate to the US than non-graduates. The scale of the outflow is considerable. In 2000 (the latest year for which data are available), one in eight of all graduates from Sub-Saharan Africa with tertiary education were outward migrants. In eleven countries in the region (the Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Rwanda, S„o TomÈ e Principe, Sierra Leone, Somalia and Uganda), including nine least developed countries, the proportion is between a quarter and half; in four more (Cape Verde, The Gambia, Mauritius and the Seychelles) it is between 56% and 83% (World Bank, n.d. b).
While it was widely predicted, on the basis of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, that trade liberalisation and the development of global supply chains would substitute for labour mobility, this has also not been the case. This is unsurprising, as the theoretical argument rests critically on several assumptions which are of at best questionable validity ñ notably that all countries produce all goods, and that imported goods are close substitutes for domestically-produced goods. It is also based only on comparative static considerations, without taking account of dynamic effects which are central to development, and of much greater long-term importance (Davis and Mishra, 2007).
The result has rather been a process which drives inequality, both between countries and among individuals. Countries with relatively favourable initial conditions, such as the emerging markets, have been able to attract foreign capital and use it to exploit increasing trade opportunities, thus converging towards those at the top of the distribution. Most low-income and least developed countries, conversely, suffer capital flight and ìbrain drainî, further weakening their development prospects. 
Global Inequality and Sustainability Challenges: an Overview
Global inequality has potentially important impacts on financial/economic and environmental sustainability at the global level. Implications for social and political sustainability are not discussed here: while conflicts at the national level threaten cross-border economic interests, give rise to pressures for external intervention, and/or fuel international terrorism, they are not such as to threaten the sustainability of development as a global process.
Financial and Economic Sustainability ñ Financial Crises
In parallel with the increasing global mobility of capital, recent decades have witnessed an  unprecedented frequency and severity of financial crises (Kindleberger and Aliber, 2011). Their relationship with inequality is most clearly demonstrated by the current financial crisis, several analyses highlighting the role of inequality in its generation (eg Milanovic, 2009; Stiglitz, 2009 and 2012; Rajan, 2010; Reich, 2010; Kumhof and RanciËre, 2010; Roubini, 2011). 
The starting point of such analyses is the increasing concentration of income in the US in the 30 years preceding the crisis: between 1976 and 2007, 58% of the additional income generated by economic growth accrued to the richest 1% of the population (Atkinson et al, 2009). Such concentration of additional income among those with the lowest propensity to consume risks limiting demand growth to a rate inadequate to sustain economic growth. This risk was off-set initially by the inflation of the ìdot.com bubbleî, and, after that burst in 2001, by a similar bubble in sub-prime mortgages. This temporarily narrowed inequality in consumption and sustained demand growth, despite still greater concentration of the benefits of growth in the immediate pre-crisis period, as those at the top of the distribution increased financial claims on those at the bottom.
However, the effectiveness of sub-prime mortgages in sustaining demand growth diminished as household debt accumulated and interest payments increased, reduced spending power. This effect intensified when interest rates rose, quickly giving rise to increasing payments problems among borrowers whose incomes remained low and stagnant. Housing prices consequently fell, giving rise to negative equity (properties worth less than the mortgages on them); and this triggered a serious loss of confidence in financial products linked to sub-prime mortgages, bursting the bubble and giving rise to the financial crisis.
Goda (2013, p26), in an extensive and detailed review, finds that ìeconomists from all three [orthodox, Post-Keynesian and Marxian] strands provide a similar explanationÖ why income inequality was a root cause of the subprime crisisî. Recent research also indicates a more general link from inequality both to current account deficits (Kumhof et al, 2012) and to private sector credit booms (Perugini et al, 2013), the key factors in balance of payments and financial crises respectively.
The 1980s debt crisis (continuing well into the 21st century in many low-income countries) is open to a similar interpretation on the level of inter-country inequality. Faced with the prospect of a sharp contraction of demand in oil-importing developing countries in the wake of the oil price crises of 1973, but unwilling to fulfil their ODA commitments, the developed countries sought to sustain demand growth by promoting the recycling of the surpluses of major oil exporting countries through syndicated loans mediated by commercial banks. The result was a major increase in indebtedness across most of the developing world, triggering major payments crises when the negative real interest rates arising from (growth-focused) easing of monetary policies following the 1973 crisis gave way to very high real interest rates arising from an inflation-focused contractionary response to further oil price increases in 1979.
The link from inequality to financial crises is the more problematic because, with the notable exception of the 1930s, such crises themselves have historically increased inequality within the countries affected (Bordo and Meissner, 2011), suggesting the existence of a vicious circle of increasing inequality and financial crisis.
Environmental Sustainability ñ the Production Side
Threats to the environmental sustainability of development may be seen in terms of production and consumption, both of which are affected by incomes, and hence inequality, both between individuals and between countries.
On the production side, most viable development paths for low-income countries entail environmental costs, primarily through industrialization and natural resource exploitation. Here, the prevalence of extreme poverty means that additional income and livelihood opportunities are valued very highly relative to environmental amenity; and this may be accentuated by inequality, through its effect in increasing poverty relative to overall incomes. There is little incentive, and generally limited capacity, to enforce environmental standards; and doing so risks limiting export competitiveness and deterring foreign investment.
As development progresses, incomes rise and environmental costs accumulate, tipping the balance progressively towards greater environmental protection; and enforcement capacity also increases. Ultimately, a point may be reached where environmental protection measures are sufficient to outweigh the effects of further economic growth, allowing a net improvement in at least those aspects of the local environment which are particularly valued. (It is noteworthy in this context that the one area in which the environmental Kuznets curve, as discussed in Chapter 2, has been found to be valid is atmospheric pollutants which have adverse health effects (Dinda, 2004).) In the developed countries in particular, environmental goals are a major consideration, reflecting the strength of environmental lobbies. 
However, since income is also still valued, the incentives are primarily for displacement of the environmental costs associated with higher consumption levels (eg through trade and/or off-shoring of production) rather than for their reduction, where this would entail a reduction in income or consumption. This displacement, in turn, creates the opportunity and the incentive for low-income countries to pursue development strategies which sacrifice their own environments.
Thus very low levels of income in some countries may be seen both as a primary driver of environmentally damaging development, and as providing countries at higher levels of income with the opportunity to displace the environmental impacts of their consumption rather than reducing them. Conversely, this displacement itself strengthens the incentives for low-income countries to pursue environmentally unsustainable development paths. Reducing between-country inequality thus has the potential to increase environmental sustainability globally, by increasing the valuation of environmental amenity in countries at the bottom of the distribution, and tilting the incentives for countries at the top of the distribution to reduce their environmental footprints.
Similarly, reducing inequality within low-income countries may reduce pressure for governments to sacrifice environment for livelihoods, by raising the lowest incomes. The demand for environmental protection relative to income may be seen as a product, less of average income, than of poverty or human development. Thus Chen et al (2010), analysing the relationship between national ecological footprints and the human development indicator, find a significant U-shaped relationship ñ the opposite of the inverted U-shaped curve indicated by the environmental Kuznets curve hypothesis: at low levels of human development, further improvements are associated with a reduction in footprints, the relationship being reversed at higher human development.
Environmental Sustainability ñ the Consumption Side
On the consumption side, increasing in income are inevitably associated with an increase in consumption, and hence almost inevitably with an increase in the associated environmental impacts. However, there is no reason to expect this relationship to be consistent across different levels of income, as the composition of consumption also changes with rising income. Equally, while the effect arises primarily at the individual level (that is, the level and composition of each householdís consumption changes as its own income changes), there may be additional effects on overall consumption patterns arising from changes in national income per capita. 
Empirical investigation of the relationship between ecological footprints and national income per capita on the basis of cross-sectional data (eg Hammond, 2006; Cranston et al, 2010) have typically assumed a relationship in the form
and found x < 1. This suggests a declining relationship between absolute increases in income and changes in ecological footprints as per capita income rises, which in turn implies that a lower level of between-country inequality would be associated with a higher aggregate footprint. 
However, this is at least partly a product of the functional form adopted, and the analysis across all countries. As shown in Figure 5.2, the relationship with GDP per capita (controlling for population density) is at most very weak at relatively low income levels (up to about the GDP per capita of India, now a lower-middle-income country): while there is a marked upward gradient between the two vertical lines (broadly corresponding with the income range of middle-income countries), there is little discernible trend above or below.
This suggests that raising the income levels of low-income countries will have at most a very limited net effect on the global environment through the associated increase in consumption. Together with the effects on the production side, this implies that a reduction in between-country inequality has the potential to improve environmental sustainability significantly. 
Global Inequality and Climate Change
The Necessity of Global Action
Among all global environmental challenges, global warming is uniquely threatening and uniquely urgent, and its consequences largely irreversible. According to the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (2013, p28), 
A large fraction of anthropogenic climate change resulting from CO2 emissions is irreversible on a multi-century to millennial time scale, except in the case of a large net removal of CO2 from the atmosphere over a sustained period. Surface temperatures will remain approximately constant at elevated levels for many centuries after a complete cessation of net anthropogenic CO2 emissions.
It is estimated that the global surface temperature rose by 0.85∞C between 1880 and 2012, and by around 0.5∞C between the 1970s and 2000-10 alone (IPCC, 2013, p5 and Figure SPM.1(a)). Anthropogenic radiative forcing (RF, the difference between the radiative energy received by the Earth and that reflected back into space) roughly doubled between 1950 and 1981, and again between 1981 and 2010, almost entirely a result of increased greenhouse gas emissions. Thus the increase in anthropogenic RF between 1950 and 1981 was as great as in the previous two centuries, and doubled again in 1981-2010, rising by 43% between 2005 and 2011 alone (IPCC, 2013, Figure SPM.5 and p13).
This largely reflects the continued failure to take effective action to address greenhouse gas emissions globally. Despite an estimated need to reduce emissions by 60-80% from their 1990 level by 2050 to stabilize the global temperature rise to 2∞C above its pre-industrial level, emissions rose by 54% between 1990 and 2011 (IPCC, 2013, p12).
The potential impacts of climate change are devastating. The IPCC (2013) sets out four scenarios: one mitigation scenario, allowing the global temperature to be stabilised; one very high emissions scenario (broadly representing the absence of any effective global action); and two scenarios for stabilization of atmospheric concentrations representing. Only the first of these scenarios is consistent with the objective of stabilizing the global temperature at no more than 2∞C above its pre-industrial level (actually limiting the temperature rise to 1.6∞C, with an upper confidence interval of 2.3∞C). Even this scenario entails an increase in global temperatures between 1986-2005 and 2046-65 two-thirds greater than that over the previous 150 years .
The emissions reductions required to achieve the mitigation scenario are extremely onerous, requiring a reduction in global emissions by between 14% and 96% from the 1990 level (45-97.5% from the 2011 level), depending on the Earth System Model used, with average emissions for the 2012-2100 period as whole are 69% below the 2011 level. Half the models indicate a need for net removal of CO2 from the atmosphere (IPCC, 2013, pp 26, 27 and Tables SPM.2 and SPM.3). Moreover, adopting a wider range of global climate objectives (eg transient sea level rise, ocean acidification6 and net primary production on land) implies still lower emissions targets than targeting only the global temperature rise (Steinacher et al, 2013). 
The Need for a Binding Global Agreement
Effective action on climate change requires a binding global agreement on greenhouse gas emissions. As noted above, countries have an incentive, wherever possible, to displace the environmental impacts of their consumption and production rather than reducing it. This is particularly problematic in the case of greenhouse gas emissions, because the global nature of climate change means that the effect on each country of its own production and consumption is very limited: the impacts are, by their nature, overwhelmingly displaced to the rest of the world.
The only way of resolving this problem is by collective action by the community of nations in their collective interest ñ that is, by a global agreement, binding on all countries, and effectively enforced the global community as a whole. However, in a world of sovereign nation states, this requires a genuine and lasting consensus, so that legitimacy serves as a substitute for the monopoly of force which ultimately underlies sovereignty at the national level; and this can only be achieved if the aspirations of all nations can be successfully reconciled. Of particular importance ñ especially given the synergy between reducing global inequality and achieving climate sustainability - is the need to ensure that the progress towards improving the living standards of the majority of the world population. (Around 60% of the world population were living on incomes below $5 per day in 2010 ñ World Bank, n.d. b.)
As discussed below, however, given the nature of current global governance arrangements, and the differential potential impacts of climate change between countries and communities at different levels of income, inequality represents a serious constraint to the achievement of such an agreement.
The Consequences of Further Delay
The recent apparent slowing in the rate of global temperature rise has reduced the political pressure for a global response. However, the potential cost of further delay remains considerable. Because warming is driven, not by emissions of greenhouse gases, but by their atmospheric concentrations (broadly proportional to cumulative emissions over time), it is not only when a peak in emissions is reached that matters, but also its level, and how quickly emissions are reduced thereafter. Stopping the increase in emissions does not stop the global temperature rise, but rather prevents a further acceleration in the rate at which it is rising. The global temperature will only cease to rise once the level of emissions has been reduced to a level at which atmospheric concentrations are stabilized.
Climate stabilisation thus cannot be reduced to a target level of emissions in a particular year: each year by which action is delayed increases emissions, not only in that year, but also in every subsequent year. Starting from a given reduction requirement (eg the estimated need to reduce emissions by 60-80% from their 1990 level by 2050), a continued increase in emissions thus not only raises the starting point and reduces the period until the target date, but also increases emissions in every year until the target year is reached. The effect is a continuing increase in atmospheric concentrations, and hence in global temperatures, relative to the originally targeted path, throughout the period until the target is reached. (See Figure 5.3.)
Depending on assumptions, and for a given rate of subsequent reduction in emissions, Allen and Stocker (2013) estimate that a delay in adjustment of 7-16 years from 2013 implies an increase in peak temperature rise of 0.5∞C, with a shorter period for subsequent delays. Moreover, the irreversibility of global warming noted above means that such an increase in peak temperature may be expected to result in a corresponding increase the global average temperature in perpetuity.
Global Inequality and Carbon Emissions: Household Income and Energy Use
A key factor in domestic energy use is ownership of domestic capital goods which use energy ñ cars, washing machines, refrigerators, cookers, heating systems, air conditioners, etc. This complicates the analysis of the income-energy relationship by introducing a threshold income level at which the capital good becomes affordable, beyond which there is a step change in energy use. It has been argued that this may give rise to an asymmetry in the effects of within-country inequality, for example in the case of car ownership: inequality in low- income countries may increase car ownership, by allowing a small minority people to afford cars, but reduce it in high-income countries by excluding the poorer part of the population from car ownership (Storchman, 2005). 
Particular concern has been expressed about the potential growth of car ownership with rapid economic growth in emerging market economies. Car ownership is very limited in low-income countries, rising relatively little up to a GDP per capita threshold estimated at around US$5,000 (at market exchange rates) at 2000 prices (Chamon et al, 2008), which is around US$8,500 at 2014 current prices. This is towards the top of the current range of incomes in emerging market economies: in 2012, Venezuela, Malaysia and Russia were somewhat above, while Brazil and South Africa were slightly below. GDP per capita in China and Thailand was little more than half this level, that in Indonesia and the Philippines around one quarter, and that in India around one sixth (World Bank n.d. b). 
Threshold incomes for most other capital goods is likely to be lower than cars. In urban China in 2006, for example, there were 137 televisions per 100 households, more than 90 refrigerators and washing machines, 70 DVD players, around 50 computers and microwaves; but there were only 4.3 cars, compared with 20.4 motorcycles and 117.6 bicycles, with a similar patter at lower levels in rural China and urban and rural India (Chamon et al, 2008, Table 1). This suggests a hierarchy of threshold incomes for the acquisition of energy-using domestic goods, with cars at the top. (Other potentially important threshold incomes, eg for air conditioning and air travel, seem likely to be higher still.)
Since lack of income is an important constraint on the use of cleaner fuels (Farsi et al, 2007), there is good reason to believe that raising incomes at the bottom of the global income distribution may actually reduce carbon emissions, through changes in patterns of energy consumption. Raising the lowest incomes in developing countries allows the substitution of electricity or more efficient (and less environmentally damaging) energy sources for traditional fuels such as fuelwood, charcoal, kerosene and dung are replaced with less environmentally damaging energy sources, and/or the purchase of energy-efficient stoves, etc. This also has important benefits to households, in terms of time saving for fuelwood collection and reduced exposure to indoor air pollution, benefiting women in particular. However, the switching effect is by no means automatic and affected by a number of other factors (van der Kroon et al, 2013), and its strength is heavily dependent on the availability of electricity (Heltberg, 2004; Lewis and Pattanayak, 2012). The net carbon benefits could be further substantially increased by availability of electricity from renewable sources. 
This indicates an important synergy between reducing global inequality and climate sustainability, to the extent that it has the potential to reduce emissions both at the bottom of the distribution (through fuel switching) and at the top (through reduced fuel use and carbon content in consumption). 
More broadly, there may be a case for income convergence towards the threshold income for car ownership, where carbon effects are likely to become markedly stronger. Chamon et alís (2008) figures for car ownership suggest a threshold income for car ownership in the order of $5.80 per day (at 2005 PPP) in urban India, $7.55 in rural India and $13.45 in urban China. (Since car ownership is a product of past as well as current income, it seems likely that the higher figure for China partly reflects much faster income growth here than in India.)
Thresholds within this range would appear to suggest a strong case for upward convergence of incomes for a large majority of the population of the developing world: only around 6% of the population of the developing world had incomes above the highest of these thresholds, and 23% above the lowest, in 2010 (World Bank, n.d. a).
GDP per capita and Power Generation
Besides its effects on consumption and energy, through rises in individual incomes, rising GDP provides the resources (if appropriately allocated) for investments that can contribute to reducing carbon footprints ñ for example, in public transport, rural electrification and renewable energy. At very low levels of GDP pc, in particular, increasing electrification facilitates the transition away from biomass fuel as household incomes rise.
More generally, an ìenergy ladderî has been observed at the national level, with countries progressing as their income per capita rises, from traditional fossil fuels to electricity generated by coal and oil, to natural gas, and then renewable sources, and particularly nuclear power. While the initial transition away from biomass seems likely to reduce overall emissions, it has been argued that this progression gives rise to an inverted-U shaped relationship between carbon emissions and GDP pc overall (Burke, 2013). As with the environmental Kuznets curve hypothesis more generally, as discussed above, this suggests that a reduction in between-country inequality would actually increase carbon emissions for a given level of global GDP per capita ñ although it is also subject to the same caveats.
It is also important to note that this and similar findings are based on historical data from past decades, which is not, therefore, reflective of a prospective convergence of GDP (or energy use) per capita between countries, since current and future investment decisions may be expected to take much greater account of implications for carbon emissions. In this context, given appropriate incentives, a reduction of energy use in high-income countries is likely to entail a systematic retirement of the most carbon-intensive generation capacity, while the expansion of capacity in low-income countries should be focused on renewable sources, ìleap-froggingî high-carbon technologies. This should, in principle, imply a net reduction in emissions.
Convergence and Carbon-Intensive Development Paths
As discussed in the broader context of environmental sustainability, the apparent tension between reducing between-country inequality arises from the incentives for developing countries to sacrifice environmental concerns to raise income levels ñ in this context, to pursue carbon-intensive development paths. Just as the observed relationship between income per capita and electricity generation technologies reflects the cumulative effect of decisions made before climate change was adequately recognized in national and international policies, so the same is true of the present (and historical) relationship between national income and carbon emissions per capita. The strength of the positive association between per capita income and emissions, both between countries and over time, largely reflects the limited options hitherto available for rapid development other than through fossil fuel exploitation or carbon-intensive industrialization.
The consequences of economic convergence for global carbon emissions thus depend critically on how such convergence is achieved and whether, and how, global action is taken on climate change. Of primary importance is the availability of low-carbon development pathways, focused on leap-frogging the intermediate fossil-fuel generation technologies to renewable energy sources. This is of particular importance in countries rich in fossil fuel resources, where the development path is otherwise likely to be particularly carbon-intensive (Gately and Huntington, 2001).
The nature of global action is also critical. To the extent that popular and international pressure on governments of higher income countries is to comply with national targets for emissions within their own territories, the effect will be to strengthen pressure for them to displace the carbon emissions associated with their consumption rather than to reduce them. This has already occurred to a considerable extent: the stabilization of developed country CO2 emissions in aggregate between 1990 and 2008 occurred only as a result of a 300% increase in emission transfers through trade (that is, the carbon content of net developed country imports from developing countries) (Peters et al, 2011).
As in the broader environmental context, this displacement further increases the opportunities and strengthens the incentives for lower-income countries to pursue carbon-intensive development paths. This would appear to indicate a case for an approach to climate change in which targets for higher income countries are based on the carbon content of their consumption rather than (or in addition to) their own national carbon emissions.
The Reverse Effect: Climate Change Impacts and Global Inequality
Climate change is a matter of particular concern in the context of global inequality and sustainability because its impacts are widely expected to affect poor countries and communities disproportionately, so that failure to resolve the issue effectively will itself worsen inequality at the global level. Many developing countries are particularly exposed to the effects of climate change: temperatures are already, by definition, high in tropical areas, which are also particularly prone to droughts and floods; and many developing countries are very low-lying, and consequently vulnerable to inundation and sea surges as sea levels rise (eg Bangladesh, Vietnam and The Gambia, Tuvalu).
The potential economic impact is increased by dependence on agriculture, which is particularly climate sensitive; and the prevalence of rural poverty indicates a still greater impact on poverty. Equally, adaptation capacity is much more limited in lower than in higher income countries, not only by limited financial resources for climate-proofing of infrastructure and other investments, but also by limited human capital and the weakness of existing systems (eg health services) to deal with potential impacts.
Developing countries are already suffering disproportionately from the human impacts of climate change, accounting for 95% of fatalities result of extreme weather events between 1970 and 2010. While higher property values mean absolute economic costs are greater in developed countries, they represent a much greater share of GDP in developing countries ñ by a factor of around three in low-income countries and ten in middle-income countries. In small island developing countries, economic losses have amount to up to 8% of GDP, compared with 0.1% in developed countries (IPCC, 2012).  Such costs are likely to increase further as global temperatures rise.
The expected impacts of climate change are particularly acute in tropical agriculture, and effects in low-income and least developed countries are aggravated by their greater vulnerability and more limited adaptive capacity, as a result of technological, resource and institutional constraints (Kurukulasuriya and Rosenthal, 2003). This has potentially serious implications for development, macroeconomic performance and poverty reduction in developing countries. In 2010, agriculture accounted for 24.8% of GDP in least-developed countries, 27.9% in low-income countries and 17.4% even in lower-middle-income countries, compared with 7.8% in upper-middle-income countries and just 1.3% in high-income OECD countries. The impact on livelihoods would be still greater: even in lower- and upper-middle-income countries, agriculture accounted for 32.1% and 45.8% of employment respectively (World Bank n.d. b). 
Agriculture in Sub-Saharan Africa is a matter of particular concern. The IPCC (2007) found, with high confidence, that ì[a]gricultural production . . . in many African countries is projected to be severely compromisedî; and subsequent research confirms the validity of this statement, despite risks of optimistic bias in many studies due to limited attention to indirect impacts (Mu?ller et al, 2011). Reviewing the then existing evidence, Kotir (2010, p587) found that, notwithstanding the inevitable uncertainties, as result of current and expected climate change, the area suitable for agriculture, the length of growing seasons and yield potential, particularly along the margins of semi-arid and arid areas, are expected to decrease. These impacts will affect all components of food security: food availability, food accessibility, food utilisation and food stability and hence increase the risk of hunger in the region.
Climate change has potentially important effects on human health, both through the impacts of extreme weather events (droughts, floods, storms, heatwaves, etc) and through changes in the incidence of vector-borne diseases (McMichael and Lindgren, 2011; McMichael, 2013); and again, the poorest countries are the most vulnerable. A particular concern is the potential effect on malaria, owing to its sensitivity to temperature: as temperatures rise, it is expected to spread to higher altitudes in tropical and sub-tropical regions. The potential impact of such changes is increased by the recent emergence of resistance to artemisinin in the malaria parasite (Wongsrichanalai and Sibley, 2013).
Recent analysis of the evolution of the local incidence of malaria in Ethiopia and Colombia as temperatures have changed show that this has already occurred over the last 20 years. For a 1∞C temperature rise, these trends suggest that an additional 410,000 infections will occur through territorial expansion of malaria, and a further 2.8 million infections in under-15s through intensification of the disease in already affected areas, in Ethiopia alone (Siraj et al, 2014).
The likelihood of multi-sectoral impacts affecting some combination of water, agriculture, ecosystems, and malaria is estimated to arise at global temperature rises in excess of 3∞C above 1980-2010 mean level (reached in the second half of the 21st century in the IPCCís high emissions scenario). At temperature rises greater than 4∞C, some 11% of the world population is estimated to be affected, but with a considerable range of uncertainty. In a low-probability/high-impact scenario, almost the entire world population is potentially at risk of such impacts (Pionteka et al 2013).
As discussed below, this disproportionate impact of climate change on the poorest not only implies that continued failure to take effective global action will compound global inequality, but also represents a serious obstacle to such action in a global governance systems in which the interests of developed countries predominate.
Migration and Global Inequality
As discussed above, a major factor underlying global inequality is the asymmetrical international mobility of factors of production, between hyper-mobile financial capital and largely immobile unskilled labour, with human capital at an intermediate point. One way of correcting this, in principle, would be to increase the mobility of unskilled labour, by removing national restrictions on immigration and access to the labour market. This labour mobility approach has been adopted by the European Union, for example, as part of the European single market established under the 1986 Single European Act.
It is far from clear that this is a panacea for asymmetric factor mobility, because of several key differences between labour and human capital on the one hand and financial capital on the other. First, while financial capital is homogeneous ñ every dollar is the same ñ labour and human capital, being embodied in human beings, are not. Different individuals have different skills, motivations, and personal attributes, and different levels of effort, enterprise, and drive. Second, whereas financial capital can move almost instantly and costlessly in a world of open financial markets based on electronic technology, this is very far from the case for migration: travel costs and moving expenses can be considerable. 
Third, whereas capital can move while its owner remains in his or her home country, labour and human capital can only move with the asset-holders. This adds substantially to the cost (and, at least as importantly, the uncertainty) of migration to the migrant. Not only must migrants find the financial resources to pay for travel and relocation, they must adapt to a new and unfamiliar environment, with a different climate, social culture, values, language, etc; they must either face separation from their family members, or subject them to the disruption of migration, including, for example, moving children between education systems and languages of instruction; and they may well face hostility from the settled population. While some of the worst effects on migrants (eg those associated with trafficking and illegality) would be mitigated by liberalisation, the disruptive effects of migration would remain a significant barrier for many. Moreover, even where, in the event, such costs prove limited, there is inevitably a high level of uncertainty about them prior to relocation, compounding uncertainties regarding employment prospects (and the considerable additional financial costs associated with failure to find a job quickly).
Consequently, even in the absence of legal restrictions, migration is subject to self-selection: those who migrate are likely to be primarily young adults of working age (particularly those without children), with greater employment prospects and potential incomes (with skills and personal attributes conducive to productivity), with more drive and enterprise, and with sufficient financial resources prior to migration to finance the associated financial costs. The implication is that outward migration from developing countries would increase dependency ratios, reduce human capital and enterprise relative to unskilled labour, and divert capital from domestic investment to financing migration. None of this would be conducive to development.
While remittances are widely seen as contributing to development, potentially offsetting such effects, they have important limitations in this respect. First, because the income accrues to the migrant, unlike financial capital, only a relatively small part of the total income attributable to labour or human capital actually returns to the country of origin. Second, remittances are private transfers between individuals, for their own private benefits, not for development purposes, but primarily for consumption use and (eg) residential construction. Third (more like capital), to the extent that migrants come disproportionately from among the better-off (because they have access to the financial resources and educational opportunities that facilitate migration), so their effects on consumption will tend to be skewed away from those in greatest need, whose opportunities to migrate will be more limited. Remittances are also likely to be concentrated, to the extent that they are primarily to family members, and the presence of family members in host countries substantially reduces both the costs and the uncertainties of migration.
Thus the net effects of migration are likely to be such as to slow development, thereby increasing between-country inequality. Meanwhile, the skewing of remittances towards the better-off suggests that they are unlikely to counter, and may compound, the effect of reduced supply of financial and human capital and enterprise relative to unskilled labour in increasing within-country inequality, at least in the short term.
Finally, large-scale migration has social as well as economic impacts on host countries, which may themselves increase the costs to migrants, suggesting the existence of constraints on the scale of migration, even in the absence of formal restrictions. There is a long history of hostility to migrants at times of large-scale migration, arising from fears among the settled population of perceived threats to their economic interests and or cultural values; and de facto discrimination against immigrants, particularly those of different races, is rife. An increase in migration on the scale implied by a complete (or even partial) opening of national borders to movements of people would seem certain to compound these problems considerably.
While it is difficult to adduce evidence with respect to the potential effects of such an opening, a parallel may be drawn with the opening of high-income country borders to general immigration from low-income countries is the transitional arrangements for (partial) freedom of movement between the (lower income) countries joining the EU in 2004 and 2007 and the (higher income) existing members. The results are not encouraging.
While EU countries were able to maintain employment restrictions on the newly acceding countries for a transition period of two years, and despite the deterrent effect of the financial crisis, a significant proportion of the population of several countries migrated after EU accession. An estimated 1.8% of the total population of the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, the Slovak Republic and Slovenia migrated to the pre-2004 members (EU-15) in the first five years of their EU membership, as did 4.1% of the population of Bulgaria and Romania in the two years following their 2007 accession, resulting in an increase in the population of the EU-15 of 0.6% by 2009 (Holland et al, 2011).
The scale of this migration (compounded by the economic effects of the financial crisis in the Euro area) has given rise to a resurgence of negative attitudes towards migration in some countries of the EU-15, manifested in increased political support for anti-immigration parties, notably the UK Independence Party in the United Kingdom (where the government did not avail itself of the right to adopt transitional restrictions following the 2004 accessions), and tighter restrictions on non-EU migration.
Between 80% and 90% of migrants from the eight countries acceding to the EU in 2004 were aged between 15 and 64 years (Holland et al, 2011, Figure 3.12, p52), compared with around 70% of their total population (World Bank n.d. b). Combined with the scale of migration relative to total population, this indicates a significant effect on dependency ratios. Eight of the ten countries acceding to the EU in 2004 and 2007 had increasing dependency ratios (the proportion of the population under 15 years or over 65 years old) by 2011, having declined generally since around 1990. The two exceptions were Cyprus and Lithuania, where the rate of reduction had fallen by more than three quarters from their respective pre-accession peaks.
Neither do the migration patterns do not suggest that population movements occurred primarily among unskilled workers ñ rather, migration occurred disproportionately among those with medium educational attainment. Except in Hungary and Latvia, the proportion of the migrant population with low educational attainment was 10-30% lower than in the resident population, although in most cases the proportion with high attainment was also lower (Holland et al, 2011, Table 3.21, p72). This suggests that the benefits of migration (both directly by migration and indirectly, through effects on the balance of supply and demand in the labour market) accrued primarily to skilled workers in the middle of the income distribution, rather than to unskilled workers at the bottom.
The net macroeconomic effect on sending countries is estimated to have been negative. Bulgaria, Romania and Lithuania are estimated to have suffered a permanent 5-10% reduction in productive capacity, and Latvia and Estonia a reduction of at least 3%. This is greater than the effect on population, implying a reduction in GDP per capita; and the potential benefits of remittances are not sufficient to off-set this. The net effects on host countries, by contrast, are estimated to have been marginally positive: 2-3% of GDP in Ireland, and around 1% in the UK, but less than 0.5% elsewhere.
This experience cannot readily be extrapolated to estimate the implications of a wider liberalisation of the international movement of people and labour across the global economy. On the one hand, the potential source countries (low- and middle-income countries) are much larger relative to the potential destination countries (high-income countries) in the latter case, and the income disparities much wider; and intra-EU migration is likely to have been constrained somewhat since 2008 by the effects of the financial crisis, and previously by transitional restrictions. This suggests a much larger volume of migration in a global liberalisation scenario, and potentially very large movements relative to destination country population. Against this, the greater geographical distance (and hence financial costs) and cultural dissimilarity might be expected to have a countervailing effect. Nonetheless, the EU experience suggests the potential for very substantial population movements, with significant economic effects ñ and the likelihood that these will increase global disparities rather than diminishing them.
While the asymmetry in the relative international mobility of labour and financial capital is an important factor underlying global inequality, the inherent limitations on the mobility of labour, coupled with the distinctive features of labour as a factor of production in the context of international mobility and the associated costs of migration to migrants themselves, seriously limit the potential of liberalisation to rectify the problem. Rather, efforts should be made to reduce disparities in income opportunities between developed and developing countries, viewing pressures for illegal migration as a barometer of success in this endeavour, while adopting mechanisms at the international level to ameliorate the effects of migration on development. Only when migration becomes a matter of positive choice rather than economic necessity, and migration pressures are reduced to a level at which it becomes feasible for destination countries to eradicate restrictions, can global inequality be considered to have been reduced to a level which may be viewed as sustainable.
A key measure to improve the development effects of migration would be the establishment of mechanisms for the payment of compensation for migration of professionals with skills which are scarce in their countries of origin, using the proceeds to finance training and provide improved incomes and working conditions for such professionals in the country of origin, while correcting incentives for reliance on immigration rather than domestic training in destination countries. 
Simply requiring a payment equivalent to the cost of training in the country of origin, and using this to train another professional in the same category, would not be sufficient to resolve the problem (Stilwell et al, 2003; Physicians for Human Rights, 2004). The supply of professionals would remain depleted until the replacement professional was trained; since the cost would remain lower than training in the destination country, this would fail to correct the incentive problem; and, with demand unabated, the replacement professional would be equally likely to migrate, in which case the country of origin would not benefit.
Rather, to correct the incentive problem, compensation payments should be equal to or greater than the training costs for professionals in the relevant category in the destination country, which may be several times greater then in the country of origin (Aluwihare, 2005). While the issue of time-lags would remain, this would also allow more than one replacement professional to be trained, so that the supply would not be reduced in the long term, even allowing for the probability of migration. In the case of public service workers (eg health professionals), at least, it should also be possible to divert part of the compensation payment as a salary supplement, helping to reduce income differentials.
While the pessimistic view of the development impact of migration more broadly may not be fully justified, neither is the ìremittance euphoriaî. Rather, the net effect of migration and remittances on development is very variable, depending, inter alia, on who migrates to where, for how long and for what purpose. Even where the net effect is positive in the long term, it may take decades to materialise and be off-set by negative effects in the shorter term (de Haas, 2007).
A key factor in this transition is the evolution of the uses of remittance over time, de Haas (2003, cited in de Haas, 2007), for example, finding that investment in housing construction by migrants from the Todgha Oasis Valley, Morocco, peaked 5-14 years after migration, agricultural investment occurred 15-24 years after, and non-agricultural productive investment reached its peak only 25-29 years after. This suggests that the long-term maintenance of ties between migrants and their home communities may be critical to the eventual achievement of a positive net effect.
While remittances for housing construction and consumption may help to provide some short-term stimulation to local economies by increasing demand for labour and goods, and support for education and health-care costs may provide substantial benefits to the immediate recipients, broader and more lasting developmental impacts depend primarily on productive and/or social investment. This suggests that the development of mechanisms to encourage and facilitate such mechanisms may be preferable to efforts to lower barriers to remittances more generally.
One approach is provided by RemitAid (Remittance Tax Relief for International Development), which proposes to offer tax relief on remittances for productive investment. Rather than accruing to migrants or recipients themselves, the proceeds would be pooled to fund productive, poverty reduction, enterprise, community and diaspora projects, to avoid creating incentives for fraudulent claims (with the additional benefit of avoiding perverse targeting and ensuring developmental use) (Faal, 2006). However, the potential incentive effects of limiting coverage to remittances for developmental spending appears to be undermined by the pooling of funds (the latter being designed). A preferable approach, which would greatly increase the funds raised, would be to allow claims for all remittances to designated countries, while retaining the pooling of funds proposal.
International Tax Coordination
Taxation plays a central role in limiting inequality, both within and between countries. Adequate public revenues are essential to provide the necessary financial resources for effective governance and infrastructure, essential to development, and hence the reduction of between-country inequality; and, as discussed in Chapter 4, social support financed by progressive taxation is the primary means for reducing inequality at the national level. 
This dual role of taxation in reducing within- and between-country inequality has been undermined by the globalisation of financial markets. Finance-led globalization (together with domestic tax reforms in many countries) has undermined progressive taxation; and the potential for tax evasion and tax avoidance by TNCs and high net-worth individuals (HNWIs) has grown exponentially in recent decades, supported by financial liberalization, the development of information technology and the emergence of a global wealth defence industry employing growing numbers of accountants and legal and financial experts (Palan et al, 2010; Winters, 2011). 
As noted by the IMF (2013a, p. viii)
recognition that the international tax framework is broken is long overdue. Though the amount is hard to quantify, significant revenue can also be gained from reforming it. This is particularly important for developing countries, given their greater reliance on corporate taxation, with revenue from this taxation often coming from a handful of multinationals.
Two particular sets of issues lie at the heart of this problem: issues of financial secrecy and tax competition arising from the role of tax havens and offshore financial centres (OFCs); and those arising from the tax treatment of TNCs.
Tax Havens, Tax Competition and Transparency
Tax havens are jurisdictions that, for a fee, offer strong protection of banking and corporate secrecy for non-residents, combined with low or zero taxation. However, havens are part of a wider system of ìoffshoreî tax and regulatory avoidance, in which different countries offer various interacting facilities. Despite their small geographical size, tax havens play a major role in the world economy, by undermining regulatory and taxation processes and skewing the distribution of costs and benefits of globalization in favour of the wealthy few (Palan et al. 2010).
Financial secrecy is exploited by both TNCs and HNWIs to engage in tax avoidance (OECD, 2009). Tax havens account for around 50% of all international bank lending and 30% of the global stock of foreign direct investment (Palan, 2010). Recent estimates put total private and corporate wealth in tax havens and off-shore financial centres between $20 trillion and $32 trillion (The Economist, 2013a; TJN, 2012), and it may be expected to continue expanding as long as tax abuses remain profitable. 
As well as artificially reducing estimates of inequality, this implies a very considerable revenue loss for tax administrations. Even assuming a rate of return of just 3% pa, and forgone tax of 30% of the resulting income, annual tax losses would be $190-280 billion ñ approximately double total OECD countries expenditure on ODA ($125.6 billion in 2012). Subjecting such assets to capital gains, inheritance or wealth taxes could increase potential revenues considerably (TJN, 2012), while also reducing income inequality and extreme concentration of wealth in the long term.
Financial secrecy and the distinction between tax avoidance and tax evasion are increasingly seen as indefensible, legally, politically, economically and morally due to their impact on governmentsí capacity to uphold their human rights obligations (IBAHRI Task Force 2013). Secrecy jurisdictions also facilitate corruption and large-scale crime, by making it easier to conceal the proceeds. Kar and Freitas (2012) estimate illicit capital outflows from developing countries at $859-1,138bn in 2010. Illicit financial flows from Sub-Saharan Africa totaled $854bn between 1970 and 2008, even excluding trade mispricing and smuggling. Nearly half of this outflow occurred in 2000-8, annual flows averaging $50bn pa (UNECA, 2013).
Tax havens and OFCs are primarily a manifestation of tax competition in a world of extreme capital mobility: by offering minimal tax rates, they attract substantial sums of capital from other jurisdictions, thereby putting downward pressure on capital taxation in other countries to limit capital outflows.
The OECD (1998) first acknowledged the potential harm of tax competition following a request by G7 leaders in 1996, focusing on the role of tax havens and other countries offering harmful preferential regimes in initiating a race-to-the-bottom in tax rates. The focus later shifted to obtaining information from tax havens, initially through negotiation of bilateral tax information exchange agreements (TIEAs), which proved a very slow process. Tax havens also responded that the major financial centres themselves offered corporate secrecy, and did not collect information on payments to non-residents. After several reports announcing the alleged rapid decline of the number of tax havens (IMF 2006, 2008), the IMF stopped monitoring this emerging issue at the dawn of the financial crisis.
However, the financial crisis quickly revived attention to the issue. The shadow banking nexus at the heart of the crisis thrived in tax havens and OFCs, regulatory control of many special purpose vehicles amassing bad debt being impeded by their registration in secrecy jurisdictions (Palan et al, 2010; Palan and Nesvetailova, 2013). In April 2009, G20 leaders announced a crackdown on harmful tax competition and financial secrecy, to curb tax abuses and protect their public finances.
The US Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) of 2009 was a major step, applying even to non-US banks with US clients. While it did not extend to non-US taxpayers, the net was progressively widened by the negotiation of reciprocal information-exchange agreements with other states to help enforce FATCA. The concessions it prompted from former champions of financial secrecy, such as Luxembourg and Switzerland, also demonstrated the possibility of overcoming confidentiality provisions, encouraging similar efforts by the EU. A further step towards multilateralization came with the opening of the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters, developed jointly by the Council of Europe and the OECD, to all states in 2010. Finally, the G8 and G20 summit meetings in 2013 agreed to establish a new global standard of multilateral and automatic exchange of tax information, as well as transparency of beneficial ownership (G8, 2013; G20, 2013). 
In parallel, the Financial Stability Board is working on the introduction of a legal entity identifier (LEI), a reference code to uniquely identify a legally distinct entity engaging in a financial transaction, allowing all financial flows to be tracked, even in secrecy jurisdictions. Several individual countries have also created special units dedicated to monitor tax compliance by HNWIs, reducing incentives for tax avoidance schemes of questionable legality. Even without enlarging the tax base or redressing flattened tax schedules, such units have had some effect in stimulating revenue collection from HNWIs, highlighting the potential for increased revenue collection at the top of the income distribution.
Combined with the creation of a global register of beneficial ownership of trusts and other shell companies, the LEI would allow automatic multilateral exchange of information, although it might remain possible for entities to conceal their financial relationships (Powell et al, 2011). This could allow a recurrent domestic or global capital tax to reduce inequality.
However, information exchange currently occurs mostly bilaterally, on request. While the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters provides a basis for exchange of information on request without the need for a bilateral double tax treaty, automatic exchange of information (AEOI) would require a supplementary agreement to establish procedures. 
To remedy this shortcoming, the OECD (2014), at the request of the G20, published a new global standard for information exchange in February 2014, to be implemented among G20 countries by 2015. However, its potential impact is seriously reduced by non-universality, exemptions and loopholes (TJN, 2014). Unless it is universal, automatic exchange of banking information may merely result in the transfer of funds towards jurisdictions not committed to transparency, as in the past (Johannesen and Zucman, 2012), while non-exhaustive automatic exchange of information may foster the development of para-financial businesses.
It is important to ensure that the benefits of automatic information exchange among G20 countries extend to other developing countries. Emerging economies are increasingly important sources of offshore private wealth, and tax abuses are particularly widespread (Global Financial Integrity, 2012), indicating a need for more sophisticated tax administrations  to tackle poverty (FitzGerald, 2012). A uniform multilateral automatic information exchange system could both increase their ability to address offshore tax evasion and improve the structure of their domestic information reporting and withholding regimes. However, benefits to these countries would depend critically on whether any new regime provided for uniform or fragmented compliance by financial TNCs (Grinberg, 2013).
To the extent that financial TNCs would benefit from avoiding a proliferation of different national systems, they may have a shared interest with developing countries in a single uniform multilateral regime for addressing offshore accounts. Developing countriesí influence on the architecture of an automatic information exchange regime may also be improved through mutual cooperation and joint efforts with developed countries under the umbrella of global governance bodies (Grinberg 2013).
Tax Treatment of TNCs
The current international tax system to TNCs is based on a separate entity approach, treating each TNC as a loose collection of separate entities operating in different countries rather than as a single entity. This approach originates in the first model tax treaties formulated by the League of Nations in 1928, when TNCs were still nascent, primarily to address the taxation of cross-border portfolio investment. The result was an essentially territorial regime, based on a legal fiction that the component parts of TNCs trade among themselves as independent entities ñ the ìarmís-lengthî principle (ALP).
Today, however, TNCs intermediate about half of international trade, and considerable shares of foreign direct investment and financial transactions. Much of this trade takes place between parts of the same company located in different countries (intra-company trade), allowing TNCs to exploit the separate entities approach so as to minimize their taxes. This generally entails establishing complex ìstepping stoneî structures, using intermediary entities (often shell companies) in conduit countries with favorable tax regimes (eg The Netherlands and Switzerland) and holding companies in tax havens. This enables TNCs to shift their profits from high- to low-tax jurisdictions by adjusting prices for intra-group transactions (transfer price manipulation). 
Transfer price manipulation and aggressive tax avoidance are long-standing issues for developing countries, one estimate putting forgone tax revenues at $160 billion per year, almost the amount of annual ODA (Christian Aid, 2009). Kar and Freitas (2012) estimate total outflows from developing countries through trade mispricing at more than $4.5 trillion (at 2005 prices) between 2001 and 2010, more than 80% of total illicit outflows. Even in Sub-Saharan Africa, outflows through trade mispricing were nearly double the amount of all other illicit outflows combined. (See Table 5)
Corporate tax avoidance also undermines the legitimacy of taxation in general, as well as nurturing considerable wasteful expenditures by both firms and governments in seeking competitively to impose and avoid taxation. It also distorts TNCsí investment decisions, and advantages TNCs relative to smaller non-transnational competitors, which lack the tax advantages of transfer price manipulation. 
Post-crisis fiscal austerity has further highlighted the issue of corporate tax avoidance, and popular discontent at profitable TNCs paying little or no tax has triggered several parliamentary inquiries. In 2013, G20 leaders acknowledged that tolerance of large-scale corporate tax avoidance undermined public trust in tax and political systems, and mandated the OECD Committee on Fiscal Affairs (CFA) to develop major reforms of the international tax system ìto ensure that profits are taxed where economic activities occur and value is createdî (G20, 2013). 
In July 2013, the OECD presented an Action Plan for addressing Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) over the following two years, structured around six horizontal actions aimed at improving coordination and nine substantive reform topics (OECD, 2013). The horizontal actions include a study on the digital economy, which allows a growing number of tax abuses, and the development of model provisions for disclosure of aggressive tax planning strategies and requirements for improved transfer pricing documentation. The last is potentially very significant, having become linked with the mandate to establish a global template for country-by-country reporting requirements, creating the potential for greater financial transparency through worldwide consolidation of such reports.
Among the substantive action points, the first four are aimed at establishing greater coherence in international tax standards, addressing hybrid mismatches (entities or instruments with different legal status in different countries, allowing exploitation of inconsistencies in tax treatment) and rules concerning controlled foreign corporations (CFCs). The plan also proposes reviving a forum abolished a decade ago to tackle harmful preferential tax practices; limiting deductibility of interest and other payments to related entities; and aligning the allocation of income more closely with the economic activity that generates it, through anti-abuse provisions in bilateral tax treaties, while further clarifying the definition of profits and their attribution to a permanent establishment. 
Further action points concern transfer pricing and continuing and extending the revision begun in 2010 of the Guidelines for attribution of income to intangibles, including intellectual property. This issue is particularly intractable, as the OECDís approach to intangibles exacerbates the difficulties created by the ALP: the profits of TNCs arise to a great extent from their control of superior know-how; but, since this is a product of synergy across the TNC as a whole, attribution of its value among different parts of the firm is seriously problematic (Picciotto, 2014). 
The OECD Action Plan represents an important step forward, in recognising the serious flaws in the current system, and aiming at substantial repairs. However, these are short-term remedial measures focused on the priorities of developed economies, which fail to address the underlying structural problem ñ the mismatch between the separate entity approach and the contemporary reality of a global economy dominated by TNCs with integrated governance structures and strategies defined by a single CEO. 
Further measures would be needed within the existing system to ensure benefits for developing countries, including the use of withholding taxes, strengthening source taxation of services, and improving the taxation of rents from resource extraction. However, such measures risk creating conflicts between states in their assertion of tax jurisdiction, increasing uncertainty for firms and potentially exacerbating tax competition.
A more fundamental remodeling of the international corporate tax system is thus essential, moving a separate entity to a single entity approach. Taxing the component parts of TNCs  separately, while allowing TNCs wide discretion in the allocation of profits among these components, creates incentives for companies to engage in aggressive tax avoidance, using networks of intermediary companies in convenient jurisdictions; and this in turn forces countries to engage in harmful tax competition. 
A preferable alternative would be a global unitary taxation approach, based on the recognition of each TNC as a single global entity (Box 2). This could tackle harmful tax competition and tax avoidance at their core, anchoring taxation in readily observable variables, such as physical capital, labour and sales, rather than legal fictions and artificially priced intra-group transactions for which there is often no reference market. 
Options and Constraints for Developing Countries
International tax issues are now firmly on the global political agenda; and there has been some movement towards addressing the issues of secrecy, tax competition and tax avoidance, at the global, regional and national levels. However, current efforts remain far from agreement, let alone implementation, and fall short of tackling the fundamental problems.
A particular concern is the capacity constraints facing poorer countries, which may seriously hamper their participation in, as well as their ability to benefit from, information exchange. Unless such constraints are addressed, benefits to developing countries will be limited (Moore, 2014).
Other options are available to developing countries, which could provide some fiscal benefits in the interim. In particular, there is the potential to reduce the tax concessions which have historically been offered to compete for foreign direct investment, and to renegotiate unfavorable contractual terms in extractive industries. These reflect the prioritization of short-term benefits at the expense of longer-term revenues, often been compounded by poor governance and lack of transparency (Africa Progress Panel, 2013). As discussed in Chapter 4, there have already been some steps in this direction, although the fiscal benefits have been limited. 
Further movement in this direction may be possible through strengthened regional and intra-regional coordination. Even in this context, however, mandatory arbitration provisions in many bilateral trade and investment agreements represent an increasing obstacle. 
In light of these constraints, it is likely that progress in strengthening the finances of least developed and low-income countries will be relatively limited in the medium term, leaving serious constraints both on development and on progressive taxation largely untouched. 
This suggests a continued role for ODA, and donorsí fulfilment of their ODA commitments could help to fill the fiscal gap temporarily. However, it is important to ensure that ODA reduces rather than increases financial dependency, particularly through support to tax administrations. In particular, part of the additional ODA might usefully be directed towards strengthening the capacity of tax administrations, including for handling complex information and to diversify the tax base away from regressive consumption taxes towards more progressive taxes (Prichard et al, 2012). It could also support auditing of TNCs to combat transfer mispricing and aggressive corporate tax avoidance.
Global Decision-Making
None of the issues highlighted in this Chapter is new. The anthropogenic origins and potential dangers of climate change have been generally recognised by the scientific community for some 30 years. The asymmetric mobility of financial capital vis-‡-vis labour is a reflection of the process of globalisation underway over the same period. And the problems of the international tax system reflect a failure to reform it in the light of an evolving global economy since its origins in the 1920s, and particularly to adapt to the advent and growth of transnational companies since the 1950s, and the failure of previous reform efforts in the 1960s and the 1990s.
The emergence and persistence of these (and other) problems reflects a fundamental and chronic failure of the global system of governance. More specifically, they reflect the dominance of global decision-making processes by the developed countries, which account for just 14% of the world population, and the disproportionate influence of the financial and corporate interests of these countries. (See Boxes 5.3 and 5.4.) Just as the association of political power with economic strength at the national level gives rise to an ìinequality trapî, persisting over generations (World Bank, 2005), so it does at the global level.
Box 5.3: The Global Politics of Climate Change
As on most other global issues, international negotiations on climate change have been dominated by developed countries, primarily the EU and the US, partly reflecting their disproportionate economic and political weight, and their much greater resources for engagement. As in WTO negotiations, ìdelegation power and size are hugely disparate across parties. This leads to richer countries sending larger delegations with specialists who can cover all issue items on the agenda and poorer countries sending small delegations with generalists who need to pick and choose on which issue areas to focus their attentionî (Schroeder, 2010, p30). The dominance of developing countries (particularly the US) also reflects their disproportionate share of global greenhouse gas emissions in a world of sovereign nation states: binding emissions targets can only be imposed if governments accept them, and will only be effective if they are binding on the largest emitters.
While the North-South tensions inherent in international action to tackle climate change, as a global problem originating in the North but disproportionately impacting the South, were already recognised in the 1980s (eg Gleick, 1989), negotiations have not been characterised by a simple North-South dichotomy. Negotiations have largely been divided between the European Union and a group of ìgreenî developing countries on the one hand, and the other developed countries and the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries on the other. Schroeder (2010, p38), for example, finds that ìThe large oil-dependent nations as producers and consumers alike, including the USA, many OPEC countries and Japan, have contributed much to procrastinating on climate change; the EU and many developing countries have contributed to keeping the Kyoto process alive.î
This partly reflects the divergence of interests among developing countries, notably between fossil-fuel exporters, emerging market economies and low-income countries; and, even within the South, the de facto linkage of political power to economic strength gives greater weight to the position of major oil exporters and emerging markets, whose interests in climate change are more equivocal. Low-income countries, who would benefit most from an effective and equitable solution, are the least powerful of all.
Also critical are differences between the EU and the US, not only in economic interests, but also in their approaches to internationalism and domestic political dynamics. The EU is founded upon internationalism, and has strong national environmental (and development) lobbies, and Green parties with significant representation at the local and national levels, as well as in the European Parliament. The US position, by contrast, reflected a combination of domestic political factors (not least the strength of the energy and agricultural lobbies), the particularly high carbon-intensity of its economy, and a general antipathy towards the use of multilateral mechanisms to deal with cross-border issues and to policy approaches entailing market intervention (Depledge, 2005). 
Consequently, despite its central role in the establishment of the IPCC, and in the development of climate science more generally, ìthe US has consistently advocated weaker mitigation action than its industrialized country partnersÖ [and] only reluctantly agreed to launch negotiations on a climate change convention at allî, consistently resisting pressures for specific targets and timetables (Depledge, 2005, p14). 
Equally, political developments in the US have had a disproportionate impact on international negotiations. In 1997, the US Senate unanimously passed the Byrd-Hagel Resolution, stating that a protocol would be ratified only with maximum flexibility and meaningful participation by developing countries, contrary to the Berlin mandate then governing international negotiations and the established principle of common but differentiated treatment. This effectively tied the hands of US negotiators, so that the principles of the FCCC ìwere not translated into any legally binding targets for industrialized countries, mainly due to US resistanceî (Schroeder, 2010, p30, citing Oberthu?r and Ott, 1999). The change of administration in 2001 has a still greater effect, resulting in the US withdrawing from the Kyoto process altogether (Jacob, 2005).
The EU, however, played a much more constructive role following the US withdrawal, actively pressuring other developed countries to ratify the Protocol, allowing it to come into effect in 2005 (Schroeder, 2010; McClean and Stone, 2012). It seems likely that this similarly reflected domestic political dynamics, particularly the strength of environmental lobbies.
Overall, therefore, the predominance of the developed countries in negotiations did not prevent the adoption and ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. However, it arguably did weaken it, by limiting the emissions reductions required of them. According to Schroeder (2010, p32, citing Oberthu?r and Ott 1999), the specific emissions targets in the Kyoto Protocol ìcame about entirely politically; pressure was high on the EU, USA and Japan to negotiate and bargain out meaningful targets, while all other countries got away with lenient targets as ë voluntary pledgesí based on their ë willingness to payí, due to their relatively small populations and, therefore, small overall emissions.î This makes domestic political considerations in developed countries critical to the international process, while leaving low-income countries, in particular, critically dependent on the advocacy of Northern environmental and development lobbies, which may not always reflect their interests. 
Developed country dominance may also have contributed to technological optimism, favouring potential solutions more conducive to the economic interests of technologically advanced economies: carbon capture and storage and geo-engineering rather than emissions reduction, and increasing energy efficiency and switching to renewable energy, biofuels and nuclear power rather than limiting over-consumption.
The disproportionate role of developed countries is not limited to the negotiation process ñ even the definitive official reports on the science of climate change issued by the IPCC are politicised, giving rise to a disproportionate weighting of Northern concerns. Their highly influential ìSummaries for Policy Makersî are negotiated, sometimes word by word, between scientists and government representatives, risking ìa watering down of the science to politically acceptable levelsî (Schroeder, 2010, p28). In the first and second assessments, disagreement among government representatives was such that they ìcould hardly be consensually concludedî (Siebenhu?ner, 2003, p17), prompting procedural changes before the third assessment. 
Initially, half of all government representatives were from developed countries, although increasing participation has reduced this over-representation, as well as diluting the influence of individual national interests. However, developing countries remain disadvantaged by their divergent interests, lower levels of expertise among their representatives, and under-representation in IPCC Working Groups  (Siebenhu?ner, 2003; Agrawala 1998; Biermann, 2001; Schroeder, 2010). 
END BOX
Box 5.4: The Global Politics of International Tax Coordination
As discussed above, global efforts towards international tax coordination were limited prior to the financial crisis, and still focus on developed country concerns and fail to tackle the fundamental problems. This largely reflects the dominant role of developed countries, particularly the G7/G8 in their genesis, and the locus of discussions, not in a global institution, but in the OECD. The current problem of double non-taxation of TNCs is largely a reflection of the failure of previous efforts by the OECD to address the issue in the 1960s. While the G20 includes the largest emerging market economies, developed countries form the majority of its membership, and it systematically excludes low-income and least developed countries. 
The central role of the OECD means that developing country involvement in the process remains at its discretion. The OECDís Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes, for example, initially comprised only OECD members and some major emerging markets and other financial centres. It was subsequently expanded to selected other countries, but membership was opened only in 2012, at the request of the G20. The current membership of 121 includes only four of the 36 low-income countries and 16 of the 44 lower-middle income countries (Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes, 2013). Similarly, membership of OECD working parties on BEPS has only been opened to non-members who are in the G20. While it has undertaken to consult with developing countries, it is unclear how far this will be fulfilled. 
In October 2013, the UN Tax Committee decided to set up a subcommittee on BEPS, to provide feedback to the OECD project from a developing country perspective, and to consider possible remedies for BEPS that go beyond the remit of the OECD project (Picciotto, 2014).
The role of global bodies has been much more limited. While the IMF engages in research and capacity-building on international taxation issues, only the United Nations Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters plays a direct, but essentially monitoring and advisory, role. Previously an ad hoc committee, its mandate was strengthened in 2004 following the Monterey International Conference on Financing for Development. The Committee comprises 25 members, nominated by governments and selected by the UN Secretary General, but acting in their capacity as experts, and meets for five days every year under the auspices of ECOSOC (Financing for Development, n.d.). It is supported by a secretariat of four people in the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA), compared with the 30-member secretariat of the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes .
There are long-standing proposals for the establishment of an international tax organization, most notably from the UN High-level Panel on Financing for Development (the Zedillo Commission) in 2001. The Panel proposed the creation of such an organization, with a mandate, not only to compile and share tax information and monitor tax developments, but also restrain tax competition among countries and arbitrate country tax disputes (United Nations, General Assembly, 2001). However, this was not included in the Monterrey Consensus. According to the TJN, (2012, p31), ìMany countries would like [the UN Tax] Committee to be enhanced to an inter-governmental political body, but OECD countries persist in blocking efforts to achieve this upgradeî.
The dominant role of the developed countries in international tax governance has resulted in a primacy of their interests over developing countries. In particular, OECD membersí interest in the taxation of transnational companies is primarily as home countries rather than as destinations of FDI: the OECD countries have net outward FDI stock of $7.1 trillion, and only a minority of (mostly economically smaller and/or more recent) members have net inward FDI (UNCTAD, 2013, Annex Table 2). 
Equally, the approaches they adopt tend to be reflective of the priorities and capacities of developed countries, such as tackling secrecy issues primarily through reciprocal exchanges of information on request. As in the case of climate change, developed country dominance also makes progress at the international level highly sensitive to the vagaries of the domestic politics of dominant countries. As noted above, the change of US administration in 2001 led to an abrupt reversal in the direction of the OECDís work on tax competition (although Kudrle (2008) argues that there had already been some movement in this direction within the OECD); and its momentum was restored only by the fiscal pressures faced by developed countries in the wake of the financial crisis, after another change of administration in the US.
The inequality in global decision-making, in turn, is a reflection of the disproportionate role of institutions dominated by developed countries (latterly with some participation of emerging market economies, but still excluding low-income and least developed countries); the limited and skewed accountability of many international organisations; and the dynamics of international decision-making processes.
Since around 2000, there has been some dilution of the dominance of the developed countries, notably through voting reform in the IMF, the increasing influence of the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa) in the WTO, the establishment of the G20 and the expansion of the OECD to include some high- and upper-middle-income developing countries.
However, there are important limitations to this process. IMF voting reform, approved in 2013, retains the principle of economically-weighted votes, so that the developed countries retain a substantial majority (and the US its unique blocking major minority on major policy decisions). The major beneficiaries were the emerging markets, with little benefit to other developing countries ñ the most under-represented relative to democratic principles. 
There is also a serious risk that the whole reform process will be jeopardised by domestic political developments in the US. Under the Bretton Woods Act, the US government requires Congressional approval to consent to any change in the US quota (and hence its voting share) in the IMF, or to any amendment to the IMF Articles of Agreement. Since 2009, a change in the US quota has also required budgetary approval by Congress. Combined with the USís blocking minority in the IMF, this gives the US Congress a de facto veto on such changes. The voting reform has fallen victim to these requirements, as it was removed from the FY2014 budget as part of the resolution to the stand-off between the administration and Congress (Nelson and Weiss, 2014).
The other recent progress has similarly benefited emerging markets to the exclusion of low-income and least developed countries. The latter are entirely unrepresented in the G20; only high- and upper-middle-income countries have acceded to OECD membership (or are likely to); and the reduction in the dominance of the developed countries in WTO negotiations has provided little benefit except to the major emerging market economies.
Thus the recent changes do not reflect a challenge to the link between economic strength and global political power, but rather a (belated) recognition of changes in the global economic balance with the emergence of a handful of rapidly industrializing countries. The interests of these countries do not coincide with (and may in some contexts be diametrically opposed to) those of low-income countries ñ and are in some respects converging with those of the developed countries. While the boundary between the dominant and the excluded is less clear than it was, the interests of richer countries still systematically predominate over those of poorer countries.
Nowhere are the adverse consequences of the persistence of such a system clearer than in the management of climate change. As discussed above, it is the poorest and least developed countries which are expected to suffer the worst impacts, and which have the least capacity for adaptation; and effective action to limit global warming ñ particularly if this is to be done in such a way as to avoid adverse effects on these countries ñ will require action primarily in developed and relatively high-income developing countries (oil exporters and emerging market economies). A system of global governance which systematically advantages the latter at the expense of the former can only be an obstacle to an equitable solution.
Dealing effectively and equitably with the issues raised in this Report can thus only be achieved through a fundamental democratisation of the system of global economic governance. One proposed set of principles for such a reform is set out in Box 5.5.
END BOX
Conclusion
Nowhere is the connection between global inequality and global sustainable development clearer than in the case of climate change. Discussions of the Post-2015 Agenda (eg High-Level Panel, 2013) have highlighted two central issues: eradicating extreme poverty and limiting global warming to 2∞C from pre-industrial levels. It will only be possible to meet these two goals simultaneously by addressing the extreme inequality of the global distribution. The persistence of extreme poverty, affecting 1.2 billion people in 2010 even based on the very conservative ì$1.25-a-dayî poverty line (World Bank, n.d.), signifies chronic under-consumption by more than one-sixth of humanity. Climate change reflects excessive (and relentlessly growing) carbon emissions arising principally from increasing over-consumption by humanity in aggregate. Such a coexistence of chronic under-consumption by a large minority of the world population with increasingly unsustainable over-consumption in aggregate can only be explained by the extreme inequality of income distribution globally.
The discussion in this Chapter highlights two key features of the inequality-unsustainability nexus, whose recognition is essential to effective action to address the issue. First, the relationship between global inequality and unsustainability operates in both directions: while inequality undermines sustainability, unsustainability exacerbates inequality, not only by preventing progress towards poverty reduction from being sustained, but also ñ particularly in the case of climate change ñ through the disproportionate impact of the environmental costs of unsustainable development on the poorest.
Second, economic inequality at the global level arises to a considerable extent from inequality of influence in the linkage from economic power to political power, both through formal and informal governance structures and inequalities in bargaining power. This creates a second, inter-connected, vicious circle of economic and political disempowerment ñ a global ìinequality trapî entrenching inequality from generation to generation.
The last few years IN particularly since the beginning of the current financial crisis ñ have seen a growing recognition of the importance of global (and national) inequality, and the beginnings of a dilution of the dominance of the developed countries in global governance. However, while this represents a small step in the right direction, we remain a long way from effective action on the issue ñ and the continued exclusion of low-income and least developed countries from effective influence on the global stage represents a serious obstacle to further progress. The continued procrastination on controlling global carbon emissions and the still limited progress on international tax coordination amply demonstrate the limitations of the progress made to date.
It is to be hoped that a Post-2015 Development Agenda aspiring to poverty eradication and effective control of climate change will be a catalyst for a more decisive shift. But this will require the aspirations of the Agenda to be reflected in real and dynamic action at the global level, to address the fundamental roots of both economic and political inequality.

