World Economic and Social Survey 2015: MDG Lessons for Post-2015
Chapter I: The MDGs: legacies and lessons of the global development agenda
Key messages
* The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were the culmination of over a decade of political mobilizations and renewed thinking about the concept of development, away from the narrow orthodoxy centred in economic growth. Concerted efforts at the international and national levels to achieve them brought about significant development progress.
* These goals became: a framework for development cooperation and a point of reference for the programmatic activities of multilateral institutions and regional development banks; a widely shared, multi-stakeholder effort; a powerful tool for advocacy and political mobilisation around issues that are essential to people; and a point of reference to guide national policies towards priority development issues. 
* The MDG monitoring framework helped to improve statistical capacity and data availability, prompted public support and funding for development, and informed development policy decision making.
* While the MDG targets were formulated as global targets to be achieved through the combined effect of progress in all countries, many countries adapted their goals, benchmarks, indicators, and targets on the basis of specific national conditions.
* Going forward countries should build on the foundation laid by the MDGs in order to adopt a new set of internationally-agreed development goals after 2015 with the expectation that policy implementation should be relatively immediate; however, these goals need to be better integrated in development planning and financing frameworks. 
* There also needs to be coherence between development policies and a clear understanding of how to tailor these policies to overcome specific quantity and quality constraints in each countrys at given starting conditions.
* Improving the quantity and quality of human resources for the provision of social service delivery and a better use of statistics and analysis will be critical for the achievement of development goals. 
* It will be important that countries undertake effective monitoring and evaluation of programmes and their outcomes to ensure policy coherence, effectiveness, and adequate outreach of targeted populations, effort that needs to be rooted in good governance, community involvement and decentralization, periodic assessments, and adequate use of statistical capacity and data availability.
Introduction
The launching of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) at the dawn of the present century ushered in one of the most important initiatives undertaken by the United Nations. It strengthened the connection between the fundamental values and principles of the United Nations and actual development efforts by Member States. It also enhanced the leading role of the United Nations in global development thinking and practice. 
      As the MDG deadline arrives in 2015, the world is ready to embrace a post-2015 development agenda which, along with a set of sustainable development goals (SDGs), is expected to be launched at the seventieth session of the General Assembly in September 2015. It is therefore incumbent upon the United Nations to draw policy lessons learned during the period of the MDGs (2000-2015) in order to support the implementation of the SDGs in the post-2015 period. This Survey aims at contributing to this endeavour. 
      Numerous reports document and provide in-depth analyses of the MDGs. For example, The Millennium Development Goals Report 2015 (United Nations, 2015a) and the MDG Gap Task Force Report 2015 (United Nations, 2015b) are examples of reports that the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat has issued on an annual basis to monitor progress, identify implementation gaps and make recommendations with respect to achieving the MDGs. The Global Monitoring Report, a joint publication of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, has provided yearly in-depth analysis in a particular MDG-related area of importance, in addition to monitoring, within a framework of accountability in global development policy, the overall progress in achieving the MDGs. Further, a large number of regional and country reports have focused on progress in achieving the MDGs in individual regions and countries. MDG reports have also been produced periodically in countries since the initial stock of indicators used to monitor progress was taken, with the majority of reports beginning around 2004. Over 400 of these country reports had been prepared by 2013 (UNDG, 2013) and more are expected to be produced as the period covered by the MDGs expires. There are many other reports as well, written by UN agencies, funds and programmes, civil society organizations, academics, and others.
      The present World Economic and Social Survey does not aim at conducting an exhaustive assessment of the MDGs experience. It does not aim at discussing the goals strengths and weakness (e.g., issues of omissions, benchmarks and indicators, targets, universality or lack thereof, and so forth) or at taking stock of what countries have achieved either. The Survey reviews instead key policies and strategies adopted during the course of the implementation of the MDGs which may have contributed to making progress towards the goals, whether these policies and strategies where explicitly designed or not for the goals, and draws lessons that can support the implementation of the post-2015 development agenda. The focus of this Survey is on implementation issues at the national level, although the critical role of global efforts in facilitating the implementation is also noted. For this purpose, this Survey engages primarily in a meta-analysis; that is, an analysis of other analyses and assessments already available. This allows both a consolidation of coverage on a wide variety of topics, but also some analysis of overlaps and instances that demonstrate the benefit of policy coordination.
      Lessons drawn may more specifically assist Member States in implementing the post-2015 development agenda, although the Survey is not aimed at prescribing a full range of policies and strategies for the post-2015 development era. Those policies can be developed only by Member States themselves in the light of their own specific conditions.
The origin of the MDGs 
The adoption of the MDGs by the consensus reached by 193 heads of State and Government at the UN Millennium Summit in 2000 follows over a decade of worldwide political mobilizations and a rich intellectual debate seeking to broaden the concept of development. It came in sharp contrast to the economic orthodoxy imposed by the Washington Consensus in the 1980s and 1990s. A decade of international conferences in the 1990s renewed the UN commitment to international development.
The United Nations commitment to international development since its foundation
Development is one of the three pillars of the work of the United Nations, along with peace and security and human rights. The very structure of the United Nations, specifically the importance of the Economic and Social Council and the Security Council, underlines the importance of the development pillar. The United Nations threw itself into a consideration of the global development agenda soon after its founding and issued three major reports (United Nations, 1949, 1951a, 1951b). These reports reflected the recognition that developing countries needed to raise savings, investment and the rate of economic growth (Jolly, 2005). 
      By the 1960s, the United Nations development thinking had already started to extend beyond the narrow confines of the subject of economic growth. Pursuant to the designation by the General Assembly, in its resolution 1710 (XVI) of 19 December 1961, of the 1960s as the First United Nations Development Decade, the United Nations published, in 1962, a report of the Secretary-General entitled The United Nations development decade: proposals for action (United Nations, 1962), which suggested directions for development efforts. In the foreword to this document, the then Secretary-General, U Thant, declared that [d]evelopment is not just economic growth, it is growth plus change. The report also took of the advice of the Economic and Social Council, which exhorted to avoid putting over-riding and disproportionate emphasis on the more material aspects of growth. The Council also cautioned that [h]uman rights may be submerged and human beings seen only as instruments of production, rather than as free entities for whose welfare and cultural advance the increased production is intended, and thus that [t]he end may be forgotten in the preoccupation with the means (ibid., 1962, pp. 10-11; Jolly, 2005, p. 53). The first session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), held in Geneva in 1964, played an important role in advancing this thinking of the United Nations on development. 
      In the 1970s, the International Labour Organization (ILO) pioneered the concept of meeting basic needs as the fundamental goal of development, to be achieved through a focus on employment. These ideas were put forward formally in the resolutions adopted by the World Employment Conference in 1976. They were also picked up by the World Bank and led to the formulation of the redistribution with growth model. 
      The 1970s also saw the first spate of international conferences focused on various particular development issues, including the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm, 1972), the World Food Conference (Rome, 1974), the World Population Conference (Bucharest, 1974), the United Nations Conference on Human Settlements (Vancouver, 1976) and United Nations Conference on Science and Technology for Development (Vienna, 1979). The World Conference of the International Womens Year (Mexico City, 1975) led to the establishment of the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) and the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). Later on 18 December 1979, the General Assembly adopted resolution 34/180 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
      However, the basic needs approach to development receded as the most prominent approach shortly thereafter. Following the debt crisis and the recession in the early 1980s, the World Bank and the IMF adopted a programme of structural adjustment, focused on curbing inflation, reducing deficits, and restoring macroeconomic balance. The countries of Latin America and Africa were, in particular, subjects of such structural adjustment programmes. While successful to some extent in containing inflation and cutting deficits, these programmes also resulted in a lost decade of development in large parts of those two developing regions. 
      Alarmed by the adverse consequences of structural adjustment policies for economic and social development, various United Nations organizations put forward ideas defending employment and social spending. The United Nations Childrens Fund (UNICEF), for example, published a volume on the impact of structural adjustment programmes and argued for adjustment with a human face. Along similar lines, the Council of Ministers of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) adopted, on 10 April 1989, the African Alternative Framework to Structural Adjustment Programmes for Socio-Economic Recovery and Transformation (AAF-SAP). The General Assembly took note of the AAF-SAP with interest in its resolution 44/24 of 17 November 1989. 
      Meanwhile, supported by the theoretical work of Amartya Sen (1983, 1985, 1988, 1989), there was a further shift during the 1970s and the 1980s in the thinking about development and its purpose. Sen showed that what is important for human well-being is not (monetary) income per se, but rather the various functionings that a person may wish to perform and engage in. This in turn depends on a persons capability, which hinges not on monetary income alone, but on a wider array of social arrangements and factors. This framework led to two important changes in development thinking. First, it encouraged a move away from the narrow focus on income, which can be only an indirect enabler, to more direct measures of human welfare. Second, it also encouraged a multidimensional view of human welfare rather than a unidimensional one focused on income. These ideas coalesced in the concept of human development, disseminated by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) through its Human Development Reports, which were launched in 1990. The reports included the Human Development Index (HDI) covering life expectancy, education and income as well as country rankings for this index. Although this represented an important step forward towards multidimensionality and direct measures of human welfare, the Index remained a partial measure. There was therefore an urge to move still further along in this direction. 
      A series of UN conferences held in the 1990s brought to the fore key social development concerns and the demand of numerous social movements. These included the World Conference on Education for All (Jomtien, Thailand, 1990); the World Summit for Children (New York, 1990); the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1992), which adopted Agenda 21 (United Nations, 1993) and the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (ibid.); the World Conference on Human Rights (Vienna, 1993); the International Conference on Population and Development (Cairo, 1994); the World Summit for Social Development (Copenhagen, 1995); and the Fourth World Conference on Women (Beijing, 1995).
Formulation of the international development goals
Within the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), members of the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) engaged in the so-called Reflection Exercise about the direction of official development assistance (ODA) in the mid-1990s, against the background of renewed UN commitment to international development. At that time, ODA was largely focussed to support countries in transition. In May 1996 the DAC published the document Shaping the twenty first century: the contribution of development co-operation (OECD, 1996), which assembled a short list of the targets and goals adopted in the UN international conferences, particularly in the areas of poverty, education, health, gender, environment and governance. The document contained the following six quantitative goals: (a) poverty reduction by half by 2015; (b) universal primary education; (c) gender equality; (d) infant mortality reduction by two thirds and maternal mortality reduction by three fourths; (e) access to primary health care and reproductive health services; and (f) reversing loss of environmental resources. These came to be known as the international development goals (IDGs) (Manning, 2009).
      The IDGs gained support in the development community as well as among leading international organizations. The OECD, the United Nations, the World Bank and the IMF initiated a process of cooperation at the secretariat level with a view to agreeing on indicators for monitoring progress towards the IDGs. The Group of Eight (G8), at its twenty-fourth Summit in Birmingham, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in 1998, supported the IDGs despite certain reservations on the part of some of its members.
      The cooperation among the OECD, the United Nations Secretariat, the World Bank and the IMF led to the finalization of a set of seven IDGs with 21 indicators. The goals had already been included in box 6.2 of the UNDP Human Development Report 1997 (United Nations Development Programme, 1997), as well as in the World Banks World Development Indicators (from 1998 onward). The World Bank and the IMF came to see the relevance of the IDGs for resolving the debt problems of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC), as reflected in the World Bank-IMF paper entitled Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative: strengthening the link between debt relief and poverty reduction (International Monetary Fund and International Development Association, 1999).
      In 1999, United Nations organizations adopted a revised set of guidelines for the production of common country assessments and for the United Nations Development Assistance Framework, which included, among their 40 indicators, most of the 21 indicators that had emerged from the DAC-led process. The outcome of this cooperation was made public in the June 2000 report entitled A better world for all: progress towards the international development goals (International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, United Nations and World Bank Group, 2000). This report was launched by the then Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, in Geneva at the twenty-fourth special session of the General Assembly, entitled World Summit for Social Development and beyond: achieving social development for all in a globalizing world, held from 26 June to 1 July 2000. 
The United Nations Millennium Declaration and the formulation of the MDGs
Preparations for the Millennium Summit, to be held in September 2000, were marked by the significant propulsion of unprecedented political mobilizations in the 1990s and by the end of the cold war. The international development community was ready to embrace a longer view and ponder long-term development goals. These were the times for refocusing attention and shifting the enormous quantities of resources that had been channelled towards armaments in the direction of activities for peaceful development. 
      On 27 March 2000, the report of the Secretary-General entitled We the peoples: the role of the United Nations in the twenty-first century (United Nations, General Assembly, 2000) set out proposals related to the Millennium Declaration, to be adopted at the Summit. The report was expansive in laying out the new challenges of the new century, focusing on globalization and governance, freedom from want, freedom from fear, sustaining our future and renewing the United Nations. The last section (VII) of the report presented, for consideration by the Summit, a compilation of values and priorities (including the Secretary-Generals own initiatives) with regard to poverty reduction, peace and security, environment, and strengthening the United Nations. 
      The Millennium Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly by its resolution 55/2 of 8 September 2000. It followed the expansiveness of We the peoples and included sections on values and principles, peace, security and disarmament, development and poverty eradication, protecting our common environment, human rights, democracy and good governance, protecting the vulnerable, meeting the special needs of Africa, and strengthening the United Nations. The section on development and poverty eradication contained the following list of time-bound targets:
* To halve, by the year 2015, the proportion of the worlds people whose income is less than a dollar a day and the proportion of people who suffer from hunger and, by the same date, to halve the proportion of people who are unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water.
* To ensure that, by the same date, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be able to complete a full course of primary schooling and that girls and boys will have equal access to all levels of education.
* By the same date, to have reduced maternal mortality by three quarters, and under-five child mortality by two thirds, of their current rates.
* To have by then halted, and begun to reverse, the spread of HIV/AIDS, the scourge of malaria and other major diseases that afflict humanity.
* To provide special assistance to children orphaned by HIV/AIDS.
* By 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers as proposed in the Cities without Slums initiative.
      The final formulation of the MDGs was the result of further refinement in the technical formulation of these time-bound targets and the selection of indicators that would facilitate equally unprecedented efforts for monitoring progress. Additional targets and indicators were added following the outcome of the World Summit held on 14-16 September 2005 for issues related to reproductive health, access to HIV/AIDS treatment and loss of biodiversity. Also, some targets were revised and relocated (e.g., the employment target) or simply reallocated (e.g., the safe drinking water target). When the revisions were completed, the MDG framework (effective from January 2008) contained 8 goals, 21 targets and 60 indicators (see appendix 1.1).
      The MDGs were intended as global targets in the sense that they would be achieved through the combined effect of progress and efforts in all countries. Certainly they were not universal because most of them were focused on developing countries. MDGs 1-6 (poverty and hunger; universal primary education; gender equality and empowerment of women; child mortality; maternal health; HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases) and targets B and C of MDG 7 (sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation and improvement in the lives of slum dwellers) encompassed the human development challenges that mostly developing countries were facing. For MDG 8 developed countries pledged to develop a global partnership to support development in developing countries. On the other hand, targets A and B of MDG 7 were the exception; they were essentially environmental targets and they were set for all countries thus representing universality. 
Legacies of fifteen years of efforts to achieve the MDGs 
    
Concerted efforts at the international and national levels brought about significant progress towards achieving the MDGs during the period from 2000 to 2015. The world reached the targets for global poverty reduction and improved drinking water five years ahead of schedule. Major progress has also been made with respect to primary education and in the fight against AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis. Nevertheless, there will be unfinished business after 2015. For example, shortfalls remain in achieving the targets for reducing hunger and child and maternal mortality, and improving gender equality and environmental sustainability. Large gaps also remain in the delivery on the global partnership commitments, particularly with regards to official development assistance (ODA). In addition, progress has been uneven across countries, among different population groups, and in particular regions within countries. Completing the business of the MDGs will be among the challenges of the post-2015 development agenda.
      Notwithstanding these remaining challenges, the world has climbed higher on the development ladder over the past fifteen years. At the same time, the global development agenda crystallized in the MDGs has also been important for developing thinking and practice in at least six other areas.
      First, the different processes through which the international development community arrived at the formulation of the MDGs, as noted above, shifted the emphasis from economic growth to a broader development agenda prioritizing issues related to poverty reduction, education, health, gender, and so forth. Greater coherence between economic policy and other policies, especially those in the social domain, became a necessity to ensure more inclusiveness and equitability of economic growth. By 2010 the international community considered sustained, inclusive and equitable growth a key driver for achieving the MDGs.
      Second, the MDGs became a framework for development cooperation and a point of reference for the programmatic activities of multilateral institutions (including the World Bank and the IMF) and regional development banks.
      Third, importantly, the MDGs became a point of reference to guide national policies towards priority development issues.
      Fourth, the MDGs energized not only national Governments and organizations associated with them, but many non-State and non-governmental actors as well. Many non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, foundations and other philanthropic entities, and even individuals, played important roles in the adoption of the MDGs at the country level, and in further contributing to progress towards achieving these goals. Many business organizations, including multinational corporations and other private companies, also joined the MDG efforts in various ways. The MDGs thus became a widely shared, multi-stakeholder effort. Indeed, one of the main successes of the MDGs lays in its mobilization of forces for development across the board, at the global, regional, and national levels. 
      Fifth, the MDGs became a powerful tool for advocacy and political mobilisation around issues that are essential to people. Since the early stages of adoption it became a necessity for national Governments to enhance awareness and sensitize the general public as well as mobilize social support for the goals.
      Sixth, the MDG monitoring framework helped to improve statistical capacity and data availability, prompted public support and funding for development, and informed development policy decision making.
      Some of the legacies of the MDGs that are most pertinent for implementation of development goals at the country level are discussed in more length below.
National adoption as the basis for adaptation and implementation
After adoption of the MDGs by the General Assembly, it took some time for the goals to gain momentum at the country level. Between the endorsement of the Millennium Declaration and around the mid-2000s, the international development system and national Governments considered ways to start actively supporting and participating in the adoption of the MDGs within national frameworks. Advocacy and awareness were well underway to rally political and public support for the goals, but generally at the international level. At the time, advice from the UN system to countries on concrete policies for making progress towards the achievement of the MDGs only emerged slowly. Practitioners on the ground found it challenging to define strategies to best push the MDG agenda and internalize it, before translating it into actual programmes at the country level.
      The International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Monterrey, Mexico, from 18 to 22 March 2002, made some headway towards, among other things, noting the dramatic shortfalls in resources available compared to what would be required to achieve the internationally-agreed development goals, including the MDGs. At the time, there were early steps to address the MDGs in the context of national development plans and strategies in a number of countries, for example, in Bolivia, Guatemala, Senegal and Tanzania (Alarcn, 2003). However, the adoption of the MDGs increasingly gained traction until around 2004-2005, through a mobilization effort from UN agencies aimed at working with national Governments in order to take stock of initial MDG progress. This generally resulted in the preparation of the first MDG progress reports by countries. 
      Political leaders worked decisively with the UN system to adopt the goals at the country level. They were essential actors for forging consensus on adoption issues through wide consultations with stakeholders at all levels (top decision-makers, parliamentarians, UN agencies, NGOs, civil society, and the private sector). In some instances they also supported changes in legislation and the incorporation of the MDGs into development planning frameworks, which were important steps to adopt and implement programmes and processes to achieve the goals.
Consultation and advocacy
Consultation was usually pursued through the organization of workshops aimed to develop action plans jointly by all stakeholders. It sought initial consensus in terms of internalizing, localizing or contextualizing the MDGs and the data required for taking initial stock and monitoring of progress. Consensus was a necessity in the preparation of the first MDG progress report. Stakeholders were usually divided into technical working groups or taskforces, which in some cases were facilitated by a UN agency with the relevant mandate. The process proved effective in forging partnerships and political commitment towards the MDGs. 
      From the outset, internalizing, localizing or contextualizing the MDGs was necessary to balance ambition with realism and to facilitate alignment of MDGs with national development planning frameworks. Some countries added a 9th MDG: Afghanistan adopted the goal of enhancing security; Mongolia and Albania adopted goals on human rights and/or democratic governance; Cambodia and Laos adopted goals to remove unexploded ordnance, to name a few examples. 
      National targets and indicators were also adopted. For example, because of the challenges Afghanistan was facing in reducing the maternal mortality ratio at the time of adopting the MDGs, this country added targets for reducing the countrys high fertility rate (which was acting as a deterrent to MDG progress) and for increasing the proportion of women receiving antenatal care. Pakistan, as part of efforts to improve gender equality, particularly in education, adopted a target for youth literacy gender parity. A number of countries also added national targets to MDG 3, for instance on combatting domestic violence (Albania, Armenia, Tajikistan, and Colombia). Other countries (Botswana, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan) expanded their targets for education as well to include levels beyond primary education (UNDP, 2010a).
      The benchmark year from which the MDGs were to be monitored in many instances was decided through consultation. In some cases the official benchmark year (1990) was not assigned to all MDGs because of the quality and acceptability of data available. There are also cases of late-entrants in MDG adoption that required adjustment of the time line. For example, Afghanistan signed the Millennium Declaration in 2004, not 2000, because of the countrys long-lasting conflict that predated the MDGs. Afghanistan and other countries have extended the MDGs as part of longer, national development time-lines (see below). 
	
      Given the breadth of the MDG targets as well as the efforts required to meet them, some countries decided to focus efforts on particular goals. Zimbabwe set MDGs 1, 3 and 6 as the countrys main priorities. For this country the effects of this particular focus have so far been mixed with both priority and non-priority goals on track to be achieved, while some priority goals, particularly MDG 1, are not expected to be achieved by 2015. Another example is Brazil, where initially much of the efforts were spent on MDG 1 as part of the Fome Zero programme. The country made fast progress towards that goal but headway towards goal 6 has been less significant, particularly with regard to reducing the proportion of people who suffered from malaria and tuberculosis.
      Advocacy and awareness campaigns which called for both governments and ordinary citizens to play a role in meeting the MDGs were also developed at national and subnational levels. Different methods were used to reach out to people, including orientation workshops (including at the provincial level), media, short films, radio programmes, summaries and fact sheets in local languages. More atypical initiatives such as the use of a logo to reach the illiterate population (Afghanistan), a MDG song sung by popular singers (Bhutan), and various sports and cultural events with appropriate MDG themes organized for youth (Bhutan) were also used. There were also efforts to raise issues in parliaments as well, as in the Chilean MDG working groups contribution to Parliamentary debates. In Zambia and Uganda, there were efforts to ensure that politicians discussed issues of HIV/AIDS in order to reduce stigmata around the subject. The engagement of national stakeholders was also pursued through international efforts; for example, the UN Millennium Campaign worked to advocate and articulate the MDG agenda while engaging civil society organizations in holding governments accountable (Pizarro, 2013).
Legislative changes
In a number of countries reforms to legislation were a fundamental vehicle for implementing development policies geared towards meeting MDG targets. Political leaders in some countries found it most imperative to enact new laws at the earliest stages of adoption of the goals, particularly in areas pertinent to women. In Afghanistan, for example, the adoption of the MDGs was accompanied by the removal of severe discriminatory laws against women. Bangladeshs government also enacted two laws in the early-2000s to address the complex problem of violence against women. Pakistan has introduced a series of new laws pertaining to healthcare, employment and harassment and domestic violence. In Morocco, the Family Code was changed which raised the age of marriage and also addressed issues of property sharing and inheritance. These initial changes to legislation were critical to improve the development outlook of key population groups. For example, changes in the legal age of marriage in Ethiopia resulted in significant increases in economic participation by women and girls 15-24 years old (Hallward-Driemeier and Gajigo, 2013).
      Some developing countries already possessed MDG-enabling laws at the time of adopting the MDGs, mostly for providing free and compulsory primary education and for reducing gender inequalities. Some of these existing laws were revised during the period since the MDGs were adopted. For example, Sri Lankas government had addressed womens participation in the labour market by passing maternity protection laws beginning in 1992. These laws were revised and expanded in 2002 and later in 2011 (UNICEF, 2013).
      There have also been constitutional amendments in a number of countries, as early as 2001, in order to increase womens participation in parliament or the number of seats reserved for women in proportion to parliamentary representation. MDG progress reports and UNDP (2010b) show that Bangladesh, Burundi, Ghana, Rwanda and Kyrgyzstan, among others, have amended their constitutions in that regard. 
A point of reference for policy formulation
MDG targets were formulated as global targets to be achieved through the combined effect of progress in all countries. Nonetheless, as noted, many countries adapted their goals, benchmarks, indicators, and targets on the basis of specific national conditions. Not only was this an important step in balancing ambition with realism, but it was also critical in the process of the MDGs becoming a point of reference to guide national policies towards priority development issues.
      The MDGs were not intended to become planning targets at the national and local levels for resource allocation purposes. However, developing countries saw in them a useful framework for setting their development, planning and monitoring norms and targets, especially in most poverty reduction strategy papers (PRSPs). For many developing countries, launching and adopting the MDGs coincided with their preparation of PRSPs as a precondition for securing loans from the World Bank and the IMF. In some cases PRSP targets exceeded MDG targets and a number of MDG progress reports suggest this contributed to MDG progress. In some other cases setting less ambitious PRSP targets than the MDG targets was out of necessity to balance ambition with realism.
      A review of 22 PRSPs, of which 15 were for 2005-2008 and 1 (that of Rwanda) was for 2008, indicates that almost all of them expressed a commitment to the MDGs and almost all the key MDG priority areas were included as a priority of the strategy, with few exceptions (Fukuda-Parr, 2010). By 2008, however, only 2 countries (Cambodia and Malawi) had demonstrated concrete steps towards local adaptation of MDGs to integrate them as planning targets. 
      More decisivethough not sufficientsteps towards local adaptation of MDGs were taken after 2008, if not later than 2010, when Heads of State and Government adopted a General Assembly resolution to reaffirm their increased efforts towards the achievement of the MDGs. The adaptation of the MDGs and their targets, benchmark years, timelines as well as the inclusion of new goals, targets and indicators, as noted above, was part of this process. 
      Another way of incorporating the MDGs into national development policies has been through adding MDG targets to National Development Strategies (NDSs) or other existing programmes. Afghanistan adopted its Vision 2020 for meeting most MDGs after broad consultations and international endorsement. In Botswana, the seven pillars of this countrys Vision 2016 plan as well as the 2010-2016 National Development Plan matched the MDGs (UNDP, 2010a). Similarly, the 7th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), covering 2010 through 2015, became the focal document detailing how Lao PDR aimed to achieve the MDGs (World Bank, 2010). 
      Some NDSs set more ambitious goals than the MDGs, partly out of the necessity to achieve similar goals over a shorter time frame, as also observed for PRSPs. Indias 11th National Plan (2008-2012), for example, contained 27 monitorable targets, many of which are consistent with, or even more ambitious than the MDGs (UNDP, 2010a). It is often the case that when development plans targets exceeded national MDG commitments, realizing the plans development targets also translated into early achievement of the MDGs or surpassed these goals in certain areas, as seen in Bhutan, Thailand, and other countries (ibid.). 
      Development plans of many countries have also included targets which do not directly match those of the MDGs but whose achievement may have also driven MDG progress. Bhutans Ninth Five Year Plan (2003-2008), for example, emphasized the need for improvements in the overall nutritional status of the population. The sectoral policy of this plan specifically identified a target for reducing protein-energy malnutrition in under-five children and eliminating micronutrient deficiencies by 2007. These aspirations have contributed to making progress in reducing under-five mortality.
      Adding MDG targets to existing programmes has been another framework to guide national policies towards priority development issues. Zambia and Zimbabwe adopted targets for MDG 6 related to HIV/AIDS into existing programmes. Both countries had programmes in place to combat the epidemic since 1986. The partnerships promoted through the development implementation process after 2000 helped to catalyse progress through the already existing frameworks by channelling resources into already operational, but underfunded, programmes. Ethiopias integration of MDGs into its agricultural development-led industrialization strategy is another important example of incorporating targets into existing plans. This countrys efforts to modernize the agricultural system have had important effects on poverty alleviation, employment, and food security (Ethiopia Development Planning and Research Department, 2005). 
      A recent review of post-2005 national development strategies of fifty countries from diverse income groups, geographical locations, human development tiers, and ODA levels by Seyedsayamdost (2014) corroborates these observations. One of the key findings is that thirty-two of the development plans under review have either adopted the MDGs as planning and monitoring tools or localized them by changing the target date to setting additional goals, targets and indicators, all the way to integrating MDGs into subnational planning. PRSP countries were found more likely to have aligned their national plans with the MDGs. Nevertheless, a discouraging finding of the study is the weak connection between planning and implementation, as MDG alignment of national strategies has not necessarily translated into greater pro-poor or MDG-oriented policies. In fact, the study found that countries that have not integrated MDGs into their national plans were just as likely to allocate government funds to the social sectors as the MDG aligners. 
      The apparent disconnection between MDG alignment of national strategies and government spending is because, as this Survey argues, only a handful of developing countries have succeeded in executing development policies within a budgetary framework during the period after the MDGs were adopted. Even so, developing countries have made significant headway in mobilizing and utilizing resources for development, whether driven by MDG alignment of national strategies or not, which must have ultimately helped countries make progress towards achieving the MDGs. The favourable economic conditions of the 2000s as well as the move from economic growth to a broader development agenda prioritizing human development has allowed many developing countries to step up public expenditure to support social policies, some in the face of fiscal constraints and turbulent economic times, although with varying degrees of success with regard to MDG progress. 
The MDG monitoring framework
The United Nations and the international community took major steps to facilitate the implementation of the MDGs. Efforts related to MDG monitoring which required strengthening of statistical capacities to collect, process and make effective use of data and indicators in the formulation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development policy have been particularly important.
      The role of the United Nations and the international community has been essential, especially for the many developing countries that possessed very serious limitations in statistical capacity in the initial period of implementation of programmes geared towards meeting the MDGs. Efforts have come from within countries too. 
      Contributions of the MDG monitoring framework include: (i) helping to improve statistical capacity and data availability, (ii) providing public support and funding for development, and (iii) driving development policy decision making (see Figure I.1).
Development of statistical capacity and data
Results with regard to statistical capacity and data availability are encouraging in four respects: cooperation and coordination within government, statistical standardization and information systems, availability of internationally monitor MDG indicators, and reporting of progress. 
       Cooperation and coordination within government
Cooperation between national Government offices has improved and national statistics offices have strengthened their coordination roles. In Mexico, a specialized technical committee was set up to coordinate the integration of the MDG indicators into the National Development Plan. All ministries were involved in the process, providing basic data and reviewing and updating metadata. The National Institute of Statistics and Geography was assigned the role of coordinator. Another example is Zimbabwe whose data on HIV/AIDS are now collected by the Zimbabwe Democratic Health Survey (ZDHS), the Ministry of Health and Child Welfare (MoHCW) and the National AIDS Council. Similarly, collaborations between ministries have shown to be effective in Zambias measurements of HIV/AIDS related issues with data quality rated as strong. The Central Statistical Office and the Central Board of Health undertook the data collection in collaboration with the administration of the Zambia Demographic Health Surveys (ZDHS). 
       Statistical standardization and information systems
Statistical standardization and information systems have improved too. In Cambodia the implementation of MDG monitoring has facilitated the development of common statistical standards on core indicators across the national statistical system. A repository for development indicators and the development of a metadata handbook have been established to further promote agreed standards and to create greater transparency for users of the data. In Bangladesh a central data repository for the monitoring of MDGs has been created based on a Database Management System (DBM) with the adoption of DevInfo, a database tool for monitoring development progress. In 2003 the Albanian Parliament passed a resolution encouraging all stakeholders to measure and monitor progress through national monitoring and evaluation systems. Albania was amongst the first countries to develop sub-national MDG targets and indicators with the aim of using this information for planning and developing regional strategies, including the use of DevInfo. 
       Availability of internationally monitored MDG indicators
Data availability for the majority of the internationally monitored MDG indicators has improved. An analysis of a subset of 22 MDG indicators showed that the number of developing countries that had two or more data points for at least 16 of those indicators rose from 4 countries in 2003 to 129 countries in 2013. For instance, barely half of the countries in developing regions had at least one data point available to measure skilled attendance at birth accurately in 1990-1994, whereas 90 per cent of those countries had this type of data available by 20052009 (United Nations, 2014, p. 7).
       Progress reporting
Because statistical capacity and data availability have improved considerably, MDG progress reporting has become a well-established practice at the country, regional and international levels. Some internationally driven initiatives have been adopted at the individual country level to report on MDG progress. As noted above, over 400 MDG progress reports had been prepared in countries by 2013. These reports have been an important catalyst for a number of important advances such as the development of capacities and methodologies for measurement of MDG targets; increased collaboration between national governments, international organizations, NGOs and CSOs; and as a driving force for increased efforts to achieve the MDGs. The MDG progress reports are collaborative efforts that initially relied to a high degree on UNDP, relevant UN agencies, and other international partners, such as the World Bank, to provide the bulk of the monitoring and analysis. Over time this has shifted in many countries as monitoring and analysis capacity has improved and greater numbers of indicators are collected via locally administered surveys and assessments. 
      There have also been National Voluntary Presentations (NVP) of various countries to ECOSOC on their progress towards internationally agreed upon goals, including the MDGs. There are also numerous reports related to individual MDGs and targets, such as the Global AIDS Progress Reports (GARPR) produced at the country level by national organizations in collaboration with UNAIDS to detail countries progress in combatting HIV/AIDS. Countries have also made efforts to introduce systems of reporting to national authorities, although these differ by country. In Kenya, the Ministry of State Planning, National Development and Vision 2030 has been involved in publishing Needs Assessments and Costing Reports as well as MDG Status Reports. A Parliamentary Caucus has also been organized to monitor progress at the constituency level. In Nigeria, a secretariat that reports to the President was established to monitor and report on the management of funds allocated to MDG related programmes, while a standing committee on the MDGs was created in the Lower House (of Parliament) to produce oversight reports (Inter-Parliamentary Union and the Millennium Campaign, 2010). In the Philippines government agencies involved in MDG related projects have been required to submit annual reports on allocations and spending and the accomplishments made for the implementation of programmes and projects for the MDGs. The (National Economic and Development Authority) NEDA consolidates the reports to produce information about the governments financial investment in the MDGs (Morales-Capones, 2013). An important factor to note here is that the Philippines already had in place a well-functioning statistical system, which was able to institutionalize MDGs as a framework for statistical co-ordination and generation across stakeholders for compiling data on different levels (Reyes and Abejo, 2006, cited in Chen et al., 2013). 
       Role of the international statistical community in capacity building
The international statistical community has played a fundamental role in building statistical capacity and data collection. It has helped to improve methodologies, produce guidelines, and define priorities and strategies to support countries in data collection, analysis, and reporting on MDGs. The United Nations Inter-Agency and Expert Group on MDG Indicators (IAEG-MDG) stablished in 2002, consisting of international agencies, regional organizations and national statistical offices, has been responsible for the global and regional monitoring of progress towards the MDGs. As mandated by the United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC), the IAEG-MDG also helps to improve data and methodologies for the monitoring of the MDGs and define priorities and strategies to support countries in data collection, analysis and reporting on MDGs. The IAEG-MDG has worked efficiently since its creation to ensure that the monitoring of MDGs is firmly grounded in statistically sound principles and that the latest and most reliable data from official statistical sources are available (United Nations, 2014).
      More specifically, the international statistical community has supported national authorities in their undertaking of household surveys such as Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS), Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS), International Comparisons Programmes, and Living Standard Measurement Surveys (LSMS). There has been an increase in the administration of these surveys since the adoption of the MDGs. These surveys have enabled developing countries to produce statistically sound and internationally comparable estimates on most MDG indicators. They have been one of the primary sources of data for monitoring MDG progress (Chen et al., 2013). UN agencies have also supported the use of DevInfo in a number of countries, at both national and subnational levels. 
      Nonetheless, even at this stage a significant portion of the data in the UN MDG database is either the result of global monitoring (some key poverty statistics for MDG 1) or estimated at the country level (most of the statistics for MDGs 2, 3, and 4) (ibid., figure 1). For this reason, outside assistance and initiatives at the international level continue to be essential for supporting governments, not only in building statistical capacity but also in assessing existing capacity. For example, while capacity assessments in the process of collaboration between UNDP and country ministries have been useful for monitoring and evaluation measures, the assessments have also been instrumental in assessing capacities and building new ones as a result. In this context, an assessment of the General Economic Division of the Ministry of Planning of Bangladesh in a number of areas, at the request of the Government, resulted in a capacity development strategy which aimed to improve internal strategy building and coordination [and] proactive engagement with other government agencies in coordinating, planning, data analysis and monitoring of MDG and PRSP targets, (UNDP, 2008).
	On a broader scale, there have been important steps at the international level to assess countries statistical capacities with an eye towards upgrading their ability to collect and analyse the appropriate data. One of the most prominent of these initiatives is the National Strategies for the Development of Statistics (NSDS) conducted by the Partnership in Statistics for Development in the 21st Century (PARIS21). The goal of this programme is for all countries to have data for development related indicators that is produced and owned by country institutions. A significant number of developing countries have undergone these assessments and the vast majority of them are currently implementing or designing a strategy, or awaiting adoption (PARIS21, 2014). NSDS cover all aspects of a countrys statistical operation, from ensuring an independent and reliable director of the national statistical office to the development of a proper monitoring and evaluation framework, among many other areas.
      In addition, the regional commissions played an active role in strengthening the statistical capacity of Member States and in the use of that capacity to generate data and produce the statistics necessary for MDG monitoring. For example, ECLAC adopted the MDG Statistical Programme, geared towards statistical development, statistical conciliation, strengthening monitoring capacities, and regional monitoring of MDG indicators. ECE held numerous workshops, including in Baku, Bishkek and Tirana, to help member organizations generate and prepare human development indices. In May 2011, the ECA African Centre for Statistics published the Handbook on data sources and estimation of development indicators in African countries: Millennium Development Goals, Statistics Working Paper, No. 4 (United Nations, Economic Commission for Africa, 2011). On 6 September 2010, ESCWA issued a report on Millennium Development Goal and gender indicators (E/ESCWA/SD/2010/IG.1/9) (United Nations, Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, 2010), highlighting the gender dimension of MDG-related progress. 
       Support to development and policy decision making
Next to helping develop statistical capacity and data availability, MDG monitoring has also generated public support and funding for development and informed development policy decision making (see Figure I.1). For example, funding for HIV/AIDS programmes had more than tripled in 2014 compared to a decade ago, and about ten million people living with HIV/AIDS accessed antiretroviral treatment in 2012. This mobilization of funds is partly explained by the monitoring of HIV and AIDS at the country level. In fact, the number of Member States submitting country progress reports for the GARPR increased from 102 in 2004 to 186 in 2012 (United Nations, 2014, p. 6). 
      The availability of reliable and timely data has permitted better targeting of policies. Access to more disaggregated data has made it easier to identify problems in local areas and specific population groups, thus making policy interventions more effective. An interesting example was the expansion of the National Integrated Database for Civil Registration in Mongolia, which made important steps in improving the governments ability to collect population data. This initiative not only developed electronic connections between the capital and regional and district offices; it also built the capacities of local government officials in using the system. Furthermore, the new system improved the distribution of a cash transfer programme (UNDP, 2009). Another example is the comprehensive, MDG-based poverty-monitoring system established by the Government of Tanzania, whose indicators and trends prompted the Government to: increase funding to agriculture aiming at addressing rural poverty and food security; fully meet the budgetary requirements for primary education and basic health; and abolish primary school fees and other related costs. Disaggregated data have helped to track progress more accurately in local areas and across marginalized and disadvantaged groups in order to map out inequalities. For example, analysis of household surveys in Bosnia and Herzegovina has shown that only 32 per cent of the lowest income quintile of the Roma population had access to an improved drinking water source, compared to 82 per cent of the lowest income quintile of the general population (United Nations, 2014, p. 6). 
Lessons learned and the Survey
The experience of the past fifteen years is rich in potential lessons that are relevant for the transition to and implementation of the post-2015 development agenda, and the proposed SDGs in particular. Although the SDGs are global in nature and universally applicable, they will take into account different national realities, capacities and levels of development and respect for national policies and priorities. Each country will continue to be primarily responsible for its own sustainable development in the post-2015 period. Hence, the role of national policies, domestic resources and development strategies will be at the forefront of the development agenda. The discussion above as well as the detailed analysis presented in the remainder of this Survey help to draw important overarching lessons and policy recommendations.
Early adoption and fast-tracked implementation
While the implementation of the MDGs took time to gain traction, SDG implementation should not. Countries can adopt the SDGs quickly building on the foundation laid by their MDG efforts. Today countries are in an advantageous position: they are more aware of both the shortcomings that delayed and the enablers that facilitated the adoption and adaptation of the MDGs at the country level. They have better knowledge about the implementation of policies and programmes that succeeded in enabling progress towards the achievement of the MDGs. 
      Serious advocacy and awareness to rally political and public support for the SDGs needs to be well underway and prompted by national political leadership from the outset. A first SDG baseline report that takes stock of starting conditions in the different areas covered by the new goals will be necessary to define next steps. The approach to this first report, drawing from the MDG experience, may be critical to facilitate the adoption of the SDGs. The production of progress reports on a regular basis with the participation of multiple stakeholders was a desirable practice of the MDG monitoring framework that should be continued.
      Nonetheless, because the challenges of the post-2015 development agenda are broader, it will be important not only to take stock of starting conditions but also to assess capacity constraints during the stage of adoption. This will be central in facilitating the adaptation of goals and targets to country realities before implementation. Based on the success of collaborations with international organisations with regard to capacity assessments, these partnerships should continue as the SDGs and other initiatives are introduced. Given limited resources, and potentially binding development constraints, particularly in small developing countries, proper assessments can help to tailor public administration to country contexts. In addition, resource bottlenecks which may limit capacity development, especially public financial management, can be identified and supplemented with appropriate outside resources to enhance governance and institutions.
      It will be particularly critical to engage stakeholders at all levels to arrive at a consensus on various fronts. This is especially important with regards to the transformation of SDGs and their targets, agreed at the international level, into national goals and targets that seek to balance ambition with realism. This engagement should lead to concrete action plans for implementation.
      Changes in legislation may help to respond to the more aspirational development objectives of the new agenda. A challenge will be to ensure that existing and new SDG-enabling laws are not just enacted but also enforced. While many countries passed new laws for enabling development programme implementation, they faced problems in enforcing those laws. For example, while many countries passed laws to establish the minimum legal age of marriage as 18 years of age, many of these countries also permit child marriage if there is parental or guardian consent (United Nations, 2013a). Enforcement of the laws will ultimately depend on institutions and governance capacity.
      SDG implementation need not start from scratch. It will be important to ensure continuity between existing development programmes and the new programmes that will be designed to pursue the achievement of the SDGs. Some countries already have development plans that extend beyond 2015 as noted above, which may result in overlap between potentially different development agendas. Countries will need policy space to continue existing programmes deemed successful while integrating new programmes into NDSs to promote ownership and ensure that the appropriate agencies integrate the agendas into their planning processes with the aim of policy coherence. 
Deeper and more creative and integrated adoption and adaptation
The proposed SDGs are broader in nature than the MDGs: they will integrate all the key dimensions of sustainable development. The new targets will be defined as aspirational global targets that are not legally-binding constraints as action will be left in the hands of countries. Hence adoption and adaptation of the SDGs will have to be deeper and more creative than the MDGs. Countries will have to set their own national targets guided by the global level of ambition but at the same time taking national circumstances into account to establish realistic parameters. 
      Countries that will face similar capacity constraints as in the initial phases of the MDGs must devote further attention to this process. Prioritizing various goals may be one way of ensuring more effective implementation of related programmes, although the integrated nature of the SDGs may make this somewhat more challenging. This will also be relevant in the context of unfinished business of the MDGs as it may require directing more resources to the previously non-prioritized goals. At the same time, the myriad aspirations of the SDGs may make prioritization a necessary step during adaptation. 
      However, while the MDGs were separated into broad sectoral silos in principle, although less so in practice, implementation of policies and programmes for the SDGs will require more integration. The newly-proposed goals recognize the inter-linkages of economic, social and environmental policies in achieving sustainable development. The pressing necessity of incorporating these goals into integrated development planning and financing frameworks cannot be left unnoticed. Only in this way will the objectives of development strategies, programmes and plans be less aspirational and become better grounded in operational targets that match or are closely aligned with the SDGs. This should also guarantee a requisite fiscal envelope for implementation of the development goals. 
      Coordination efforts within government will be particularly necessary for translating national development strategies and plans into public expenditure programmes within a coherent multiyear macroeconomic and fiscal framework. In addition, aspects of budget management, notably budget execution capacity, will have to be addressed during the stage of adoption and adaptation of the new goals in order to ensure timely channelling of resources to social and environmental sectors.
Bridging gaps for making the most of the data legacy
The MDG monitoring framework has been critical for improving statistical capacity and data availability, especially for developing countries, as noted. Compared with the period when the MDGs were being adopted, most developing countries will have to rely less on the UN system or other outside agencies for collecting the appropriate statistics to set benchmarks and monitor progress for SDG implementation. Nonetheless, there is no reason for complacency. Collaboration with the international statistical community will still continue to play a fundamental role in building new and assessing existing statistical capacity.
      The challenges ahead are further heightened by the growing demand for better, faster, more accessible, and more disaggregated data for bringing poverty down and achieving sustainable development. In response to this demand, the Report of the High Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Development Agenda has called for a Data Revolution. Country ownership and government commitment to increasing resources for the statistical system and building statistical capacity, with the support of the international community, will be a requisite of a Data Revolution. 
      Reinforcement of the existing data infrastructure to bridge important data gaps will be a necessity to pursue development goals. A worrisome example of data gaps is the fact that most sub-Saharan African countries and many other developing countries still lack complete civil registration systems. These systems can be the basis for the reporting of births and deaths. It is estimated that nearly 230 million children worldwide under age five have never been registeredapproximately one of every three children under age five (United Nations, 2014, p. 7). Children unregistered at birth or lacking identifying documents are often excluded from access to education, health care and social security, which represents a serious bottleneck for development. Some countries still have limitations in assessing trends in malaria occurrence over time mainly because their national health information systems generate incomplete or inconsistent data. Malaria cases also remain under-detected where disease burden is the highest because of a lack of effective surveillance systems. 
      Going forward it will not only be critical to bridge existing data gaps and continue building statistical capacities, for example, with regard to environmental accounting, but it will also be necessary to enhance analytical capacities for using the existing data architecture for analysis and planning purposes. Data are more widely available nowadays; yet, this contribution of the MDG monitoring framework has not implied a full utilization of the existing information. The wealth of information from population censuses and household surveys has not been fully exploited. Limited efforts have been made to fully analyse and effectively use these data sources, especially the use of disaggregated information by wealth quintile, sex, specific population groups and place of residence. Analysis of data at this level of disaggregation will be essential to address persistent inequality issues going forward into post-2015. 
      The projection of possible achievement of SDGs after 2015 should be among the important monitoring efforts. In the majority of cases, the expectations that a country will meet a goal are based on linear projections of current trends of progress, as seen in the myriad MDG progress reports. While this may work for some indicators, there are frequently significant non-linear trends depending on local circumstances, including the types of policies enacted, the timing of the policies and the time lags with regard to policy effectiveness. The issue of timing can be significant as it can have different effects depending on the policy. Some effects may appear quickly, but then fade away, whereas others may be persistent or take time to appear, but then move up rapidly. For example, as will be further discussed in this Survey, investments in education may demonstrate relatively immediate effects in enrolment, but take much more time to show progress in completion or in improvements in the skill level of the labour force. Linear projections of past performance may then either overstate or understate potential achievements with consequent effects on the effectiveness of related policies. If policymakers believe that existing policies are adequate to achieve a goal based on these projections, then efforts and funds are likely to be shifted towards those goals that appear to be falling behind. These issues point to the need for further efforts to expand countries capacities for data analysis so that they can make more detailed and evidence-based projections, which could be expected to have positive feedback effects on policy coherence.
      The use of the available statistics for analysis and planning purposes is a logical following step as national statistical agencies develop their capacities. This is also important for exercises such as budgeting and programme development as well as assessment of potential spill-over effects. Only a handful of developing countries have made efforts to use statistics and data available for more profound analyses and modelling of costing scenarios since the MDGs were introduced. Ideally the use of modelling tools to produce scenario analyses with all the available data and information would be established as a standard practice for monitoring SDG progress. Scenarios on the outlook for achievement with respect to targets for different goals need to consider alternative allocation and spending options to be meaningful for monitoring purposes and to correct course where needed. It is worth emulating the practice of submitting annual reports to national authorities on allocations, spending and the accomplishments made for the implementation of programmes and projects related to the MDGs, as some developing countries such as Kenya and the Philippines have already begun, as noted above. But it is necessary to make sure these reports are informed by robust scenario analyses.
      Another, perhaps more simple solution for improving statistical assessments of the SDGs will be to take advantage of the increasing amount of data that is being collected at the country level and ensure that it is properly incorporated into the international statistical system. Currently there is significant room for improvement in communications between national and international statistical agencies. Additional efforts to ensure that national data and international data comply with similar standards, definitions and computation methods would also allow for the use of a wider variety of national sources. There are also significant issues that could be resolved with regard to reconciling differences between national data and international agencies, the United Nations included. Programmes such as DevInfo can be helpful, but more concrete steps must be taken at the national and international level to ensure compatibility.
Policy integration and coherence
Fifteen years of development programmes and progress since the MDGs were adopted have made it clear that the achievement of progress towards development goals and targets requires integration and coherence of policies and programmes at the national level. A conclusion is that development goals need to be well integrated in development planning and financing frameworks, while guaranteeing a requisite fiscal envelope for their implementation. But, at the same time, there needs to be coherence between development policies and a clear understanding of which policies have been proven effective. The remaining chapters of this Survey focus on policies that have contributed to making progress towards the achievement of the MDGs, as well as aspects of national governance and institutions and global partnerships that have been critical for implementing the policies. The review of policies is mostly for the period since the MDGs began to be adopted by countries, but in many instances the policies resulted from long-term processes that predate the MDGs. The Survey recognizes the difficulty of knowing exactly whether the MDGs were the main motivators of many of these policies. Because many of these policies existed before the goals, their use tends to be rather a confirmation of countries long-term policy commitment to poverty reduction and human development. The analyses of all the remaining chapters of the Survey combined support six overarching lessons.
      First, a coherent and comprehensive policy framework that integrates economic, social, and environmental interventions is critical to minimize trade-offs. Social policies have allowed countries to build and promote human capital while also increasing womens participation in the labour force. These policies have generally supported economic growth and various development goals at the same time. Nonetheless, outcomes and spill-over effects have generally resulted from pursuing policies as a set of discreet sectoral interventions, rather than as a coherent and comprehensive economic, social and environmental policy framework. Hence there have been important trade-offs between different types of policies. There have been trade-offs between and within MDGs, too. For example, there is evidence that microcredit programmes and agricultural credit programmes to women, which would presumably help reduce poverty and gender inequality, have actually reduced girls school attendance as they were kept home to help participate in the new economic activities supported by the programmes (Islam and Choe, 2013, cited in Unterhalter et al., 2014). Going forward it will be critical to identify trade-offs and pay more attention to policy consistency and coherence to facilitate simultaneously meeting multiple development objectives. The development of robust scenario analyses, as noted earlier, becomes very instrumental to these purposes.
      Second, although economic, social and environmental policies will be grounded in a universal development agenda after 2015, the experience of the past fifteen years corroborates that no single policy approach is applicable in all circumstances. Going forward, policies will have to be appropriately situated within the broader development policy framework of each country and tailored to overcome specific quantity and quality constraints in each countrys and communitys systems. These constraints include human capital and physical infrastructure as well as those related to financial, socioeconomic or capacity issues. At the same time, these policies must take into account the urgency of achieving results in a timely manner. 
      Third, in a similar vein, careful consideration of starting conditions and constraints will be important to determine what interventions and strategies can produce the best outcomes possible going forward. In some contexts the best known policies available are no longer as effective as when they were introduced because of development progress or because the triggering factors preventing further progress changed. Healthcare is a particular area where the causes of disease and death become visible as a consequence of successful policy outcomes. For example, the reduction of deaths in children under five years of age but older than a month has unmasked the issue of deaths of newborns occurring in the first 28 days of life or neonatal mortality, which was invisible when the MDGs were adopted. When best practices are no longer producing sound improvements in outcomes, new practices and solutions become more necessary. In some instances it may just be a matter of ensuring that existing development-enabling laws are adequately reinforced.
      Fourth, the potential for policies, especially social policies, to be fully exploited and the degree to which they are effective will depend on whether they reach the poorest and most vulnerable populations. This includes those groups that have become more visible due to progress over the period since the MDGs were adopted such as newborns, indigenous people, people with disabilities or those living with HIV/AIDS, and so on. Extra efforts to tailor existing policies or develop innovative ones will be necessary in order to ensure appropriate coverage of these groups. Integrating communities into policy planning, organizing and implementation can also improve effectiveness and outreach going forward. This will require adequate governance and institutions at the national and local levels.
      Fifth, improving the quantity and quality of human resources for the provision of social service delivery, be it teachers and principals, healthcare workers, counsellors, or others, is critical for the achievement of development goals. There is a need for continued and expanded efforts to retain effective civil servants, including through competitive salaries and proper structuring of incentives and career development opportunities. However, this will not be enough. Stepping up investments in traditional (quality) education will be one of the most important interventions to bridge the relevant human resource gaps, especially in sectors such as health. Because this investment will take time to bear fruit, it will need to be complemented with more immediate training efforts especially to increase the supply of public civil servants without compromising the quality of service. More broadly, there is scope for governance and institutions to be strengthened in the countries that most need it.
      Sixth, it will be important that countries undertake effective monitoring and evaluation of programmes and their outcomes to ensure policy coherence, effectiveness, and adequate outreach of targeted populations. Community involvement and decentralization should feature prominently in monitoring and evaluation efforts. Monitoring effectiveness will require periodic assessments to ensure that programmes are producing the intended results and should be facilitated by the statistical capacity and data availability inherited by the MDG monitoring framework and rooted in good governance and institutions. 
Organization of the chapters of the Survey
The overarching messages with regard to policy integration and coherence presented above are supported, in different degrees, by the analysis presented in the next six chapters of this Survey. Each chapter also suggests policy pathways and draws more specific lessons that relate more exclusively to their themes. 
      Starting with chapter II, the Survey notes that economic policies have been adapted depending on the economic conditions prevailing before, during, and after the global and economic crisis that erupted in 2008 with varying degrees of success. During times of economic bonanza, as in the period before the crisis, experience shows it is important to expand investment, both economic and development-related, and build robust mechanisms such as foreign exchange reserves that are bundled in sovereign wealth fundsto smooth shocks and deal with downturns. Fiscal rules and medium-term expenditure frameworks that are implemented under the proper governance structures are important to reduce procyclicality of government spending, properly executed expenditure frameworks contribute to improve policy coherence and limit macroeconomic trade-offs, and macro-prudential tools limit exposure to external volatility. In addition, social safety nets and other programmes that operate counter-cyclically should be established during times of robust growth so that they can act as automatic stabilisers in times of crisis. Later on, the combination of these types of policies allowed many countries to enact counter-cyclical fiscal policies to weather the global financial crisis. Thus, while policy space was more constrained during the crisis, the effects on the population and for the achievement of the MDGs were not as drastic as they potentially could have been. Adapting policies to changing economic conditions will be a necessary condition for implementation of development goals in the post-2015 era.
      At the same time, Chapter II warns that the initial economic conditions for implementation of the post-2015 development agenda are less encouraging if compared with those of the period 2000-2015. Moreover, at the same time that policy space is more constrained, many developing countries did not make the most of the economic bonanza of the period from 2000 to 2008 and built important spending gaps for achieving the MDGs along the way that are visible today. Against this backdrop, the chapter argues that addressing unfinished business of the MDGs going forward and further implementing the more challenging post-2015 development agenda will necessitate more robust economic growth to boost private and public spending in key social sectors. Those developing countries presenting important spending gaps will have to devise sound financing strategies that given the magnitude of needed spending do not cause macroeconomic hardships with unfavourable repercussions for economic growth. Policy coherence will be needed to allocate the resources in the most efficient way possible under a more constrained economic environment. The chapter ends recommending economic policy pathways that are necessary going forward.
      Chapter III and IV continue the overview of policies with a focus on social policies, rather than economic policies, which were central in the efforts to overcoming the human development challenges encompassed by the MDGs. However, this Survey recognizes that economic and social policies in most respects are indivisible aspects of broader development policy. In fact, numerous examples of both social policies that are essential to achieve economic growth and economic policies that bring about opportunities for social progress are provided. Because social policy is such a broad concept and in many cases overlaps with economic policy and other policies, the social policies reviewed in chapters III and IV are limited to and grouped in three major categories: social protection, sectoral policies and social promotion. Social protection comprises social insurance programmes which are usually contributory and provide pensions in old age as well as protection against multiple risks, on one hand, and non-contributory schemes such as transfers, subsidies, workfare and others, on the other. Sectoral policies are those interventions that contribute directly to building human capital, typically by investing in education, health, housing, and infrastructure. Social promotion improves conditions where human capital operates through micro-finance, technical assistance to micro-firms, promotion of production, and so forth. 
      A difficulty is that there are many instances where all three types of social policies are virtually inseparable because of budget or implementation issues. Some initiatives actually take advantage of the high degree of potential integration among the three different types of policies. The MDG Acceleration Framework (MAF) and the Millennium Villages Project (MVP) are examples of such initiatives that have combined all the three types of social policies with a view to, respectively, unlock MDG progress at different levels and  achieve self-sustaining growth in African villages (Snchez et al., 2015b). 
      The emphasis of chapters III and IV is on the first two categories of social policies for a number of reasons. Non-contributory social protection programmes are the component with the strongest focus on poverty reduction in developing countries (Cecchini and Martinez, 2012; Barrientos, 2010). Some of these programmes also contribute to employment creation and reduce hunger. In the same vein, most MDGs were also expressed as sectoral goals, thus their realization has involved sectoral policies in education, health and sanitation. On the other hand, social promotion initiatives are discussed so long as there have been other instances of these initiatives working in tandem with social assistance and sectoral policies. The Survey also recognizes the difficulty in determining exactly whether the MDGs were their main motivators of the social policies under review. Because many of these policies existed before the MDGs, their continued use was rather a confirmation of countries long-term policy commitments to poverty reduction and human development, which appeared in many developing countries efforts to scale up social spending.
      The social policy interventions identified and discussed in both chapters have featured prominently at different stages of efforts towards achieving the MDGs. The evidence under review supports the various ways in which these interventions have been critical to making headway towards human development goals. In many instances these interventions have been cost-effective; otherwise they have been effective but may have cost issues that can be addressed going forward. Many of the policies reviewed still hold great potential to address unfinished business of the MDGs, while pursuing broader sustainable development goals. The ways in which this holds true may vary from goal to goal, from sector to sector, from country to country, and even across regions. 
      More specifically, Chapter III focuses on the social policy efforts that have proven effective in making headway towards: reducing poverty and hunger (MDG 1); achieving universal primary education (MDG 2); and promoting gender equality and empowering women (MDG 3). The chapters messages with regard to these three MDG areas are as follows, respectively. 
      Firstly, social assistance programmes have contributed to reduce extreme poverty and make progress towards the achievement of other MDGs, and have helped to mitigate the impact of crises on the MDGs. The problem is that social assistance has typically been prioritized out of necessity and has not necessarily promoted structural transformations in the labour market or the economy at large. Social insurance and other (including new) contributory forms of social protection are expected to take hold in the transition towards universal social protection systems after 2015. The chapter argues that because the transition to universal social protection will unfold as part of a long-term process, social assistance programmes will have to continue playing a critical role in the short- to medium-term. Hence, a number of implementation issues and shortcomings will have to be addressed as the chapter recommends. 
      Secondly, a number of the efforts geared towards achieving universal primary education can still bear fruit in some developing countries. Proven interventions reviewed in the chapter still hold potential for countries that are still striving to meet the goal. At the same time, growing pressure on education systems from rising population and also as a consequence of the increased enrolment will require judicious use of limited resources, in line with the discussion in chapter II. As a number of countries are near to reach or have reached the goal of enrolment, other issues such as primary school completion, and quality of education, which had been previously neglected, are becoming more important and will require more attention in the post-2015 period. The discussion points to the need to improve and expand monitoring systems for both students and teachers to ensure that all students, particularly those that are not in school or those that have never attended, are covered. Finally, the chapter presents some recommendations for better integration of the education systems and the labour market, which will be important for achieving a number of development goals going forward.
      Thirdly, while many regions have seen improvements in gender equality in a variety of areas, particularly as a result of legal changes, there are still a number of areas that are lagging behind. Further efforts will be needed to enforce existing laws, and reforms of existing discriminatory laws, including some customary practices, are still necessary in some countries. Gaps remain in gender equality in education, but programmes geared towards girls, close proximity of schools and properly trained teachers have proven effective in raising gender parity. Elimination of laws restricting womens access to the labour market and particular jobs as well as employment and recruitment programmes for women have been a relevant step in some countries and have resulted in significant increases in labour force participation. Finally, quotas for women and womens wings of political parties have helped to raise womens political representation, although it still remains well below that of men in a majority of countries. This is important for womens rights in general as greater levels of political participation by women leads to increased likelihood of addressing womens issues. 
      Chapter IV reviews policies that have contributed to the health goals (MDGs 4 through 6) and further elaborates on aspects of health systems that are critical to achieve health goals. Areas of focus for future policy efforts to address unfinished business under review in the chapter include: neonatal deaths, a problem that was literally invisible when the MDGs were adopted, requiring effective integrated solutions for both mothers and newborns, including family planning; infectious diseases such as pneumonia, diarrhoea and malaria, which continue to cause most of the deaths in children under age five; and nutrition, which continues to be an important concern considering that many under-five deaths still occur in children already weakened by undernutrition and pregnant women also typically continue to face serious constraints to improve their nutrient intake, especially in low-income countries. Recommendations for addressing issues of coherence and effectiveness of health policies to tackle said challenges going forward are identified. This includes the strengthening of health systems on which the implementations of policies relies. The chapter warns that, while supply-side needs of health systems will continue to be critical going forward, it will also be necessary to pay more attention to the quality of care and the positioning of health systems as core social institutions and pathways to do so are suggested.
      Chapter V focuses on policies that supported progress with regard to the environmental targets (MDG 7) some of which were the only universal targets within the MDG agenda. The chapter takes note of the special treatment of environmental issues under the MDGs, whereby the task of setting time-bound quantitative targets was often left to other negotiating frameworks and processes, such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and examines the pros and cons of this arrangement in the light of what the MDG framework sought. Main messages to be added here.
      The adoption and adaptation of the MDGs and the implementation of policies such as those reviewed in chapters II through V required adequate governance and institutions. Chapter VI notes that various ways in which governance and institutions have been both enablers and outcomes of development. An important query, however, is how a country can achieve good governance and institutions, especially when conflict has disrupted them. 
      Chapter VII reviews development and other forms of cooperation during the period since the MDGs were adopted. While the MDGs focused initially on intergovernmental cooperation for development, over time there was a proliferation of multiple development partnerships involving diverse non-State actors. There was also a shift from bilateral and multilateral frameworks to global cooperation, including the formation and use of global funds. This chapter notes that the experience with the global partnership for development as well as global multi-stakeholder partnerships will be particularly relevant for implementation of the post-2015 development agenda, which is expected to be universal in character.

Chapter II: Economic conditions and policies for MDG implementation
Key messages
* Economic growth has generally been found to be supportive of progress towards achieving the MDGs. It increases individual incomes that are critical to satisfy basic needs and is a source of resource mobilization for the government to invest in development. 
* There have been two relatively distinct periods of economic growth. For the world as a whole, the period from 2000 to 2007/8 was a time of rising economic growth as well as increasing macroeconomic stability. The increased policy space of this period represented an opportunity for economic policies to become enablers for achieving development goals. 
* Fiscal balances and public debt improved in most developing countries. An important number of countries increased public expenditure both in absolute terms as well as relative to total government expenditures, signalling that the economic bonanza made room for development policies. Even so, many countries spending patterns resulted in important spending gaps for achieving the MDGs.
* The period 2008-2015 covers the global financial crisis, the subsequent great recession and, in some countries, the ensuing economic recovery. Policy space was more constrained and the effects of the crisis on the achievement of the MDGs were more or less drastic depending on the policy responses at the time. 
* Some countries avoided drastic setbacks owing to previous improvements in conditions. This came by way of increased foreign reserves, lower debt levels, already established social spending programmes, and other countercyclical measures. On the other hand, spending gaps to meet the MDGs became larger for some countries.
* The experience of the 2000-2015 period points to the general need to take advantage of periods of robust growth, pursue adequate policies for macroeconomic stability, improve the fundamental bases for weathering economic shocks, introduce the appropriate policies to reduce procyclically in general, and devise and carefully assess alternative financing strategies to bridge public spending gaps without jeopardizing growth and macroeconomic stability.
Introduction
This chapter reviews the economic conditions and policies that have prevailed during the years since the MDGs were adopted and numerous efforts were implemented to pursue them. The focus is mostly, though not exclusively, on developing countries towards which most of the MDGs were targeted. The review is necessary because economic conditions and policies have been critical to economic growth, which, in turn, has been shown to be correlated with the achievement of MDGs (see second section). Moreover, understanding the way in which economic conditions increase or undermine the policy space available is critical since these economic conditions are usually changing and are highly influenced by the global macroeconomic environment, especially in the case of small and open developing economies.
      There have been two relatively distinct periods. The first period covers the years between 2000 and 2007/8, which for the world as a whole was a time of rising economic growth as well as increasing macroeconomic stability (see third section). The second period covers the global financial crisis, the subsequent great recession and, in some countries, the ensuing economic recovery (see fourth section). Because economic conditions during these two periods were quite different, the policy space available for pursuing development goals, including the MDGs, in each period was defined differently. The first period was a time of increased policy space that represented an opportunity for economic policies to become enablers for achieving development goals. During the second period, policy space was more constrained and the effects of the crisis on the achievement of the MDGs were more or less drastic depending on the policy responses at the time. 
      Furthermore, it is important to note, as is done in this chapter, that fiscal space created especially during the first period may not have been enough to achieve the MDGs in many developing countries that have exhibited important public spending gaps. The discussion points to the importance of keeping in mind the potential macroeconomic trade-offs of any financing efforts to bridge such spending gaps within a coherent and comprehensive policy framework (see fifth section). In the last section the chapter recommends economic policy pathways for the post-2015 period.
Economic growth and MDGs
Sustained economic growth has been a critical enabler of policy space, albeit not the only one. In the IMF and the World Banks Global Monitoring Report for 2011, it is noted that while countries that had higher per capita GDP in 1990 were more likely to have had better performance in MDG indicators, an even better predictor is the rate of per capita GDP growth. Countries that have reached or are on track to reach the targets show, on average, the fastest per capita GDP growth over 1990-2009 (Global Monitoring Report, 2011, p. 4). Economic growth is generally found to be supportive of progress towards achieving the MDGs. For example, as shown in figures II.1 and II.2, the increase in per capita GDP is associated with a decrease in child mortality on one hand, and an increase in the access of the population to improved drinking water sources on the other. At the same time, it is important to recognize that growth in economic output is only part of the equation for improving development outcomes and even then it can have very different effects and implications depending on specific conditions.
Nature of growth matters
For some MDG targets the connection with economic growth may not always be so clear-cut. For instance, as shown in figure II.3 (an updated from a figure 3 in Christiaensen et al., 2013), when income increases, the completion rate for primary school education tends to rise in most countriesas per a fitted linear trend, particularly the resource-poor countries of sub-Saharan African. However, a slightly negative correlation is found between the two indicators among the resource-rich countries of sub-Saharan Africaas per a fitted linear trend. Moreover, although per capita GDP growth in resource-rich countries in Africa was measurably higher than in resource-poor countries in the past decade, poverty reduction in the former was actually lower than in the latter. For example, in the second half of the 2000s, Ethiopia and Rwanda registered an annual average growth of 8 per cent and 10 per cent, reducing poverty by 1.3 and 1.7 percentage points annually, respectively. By contrast, with similarly robust growth of 6-7 per cent, the United Republic of Tanzania reduced poverty by less than 0.5 percentage points in the same period, while Zambia, a resource-rich country, made even less progress in reducing poverty. In general, resource-poor countries in Africa outperform resource-rich countries in achieving MDGs, despite the fact that GDP growth rates in the former are, on average, twice as low as those in the latter. 
      One factor behind this divergence is the nature of growth in resource-rich African countries: it is less inclusive than in resource-poor countries, as the resources sector is capital-intensive, and therefore does not create enough jobs. These economies have failed to connect the resources sector with other sectors. In resource-rich countries, the increase in resource rent accounts for a larger share of GDP growth than value added in other sectors, such as agriculture, services and manufacturing. However, the share of employment in the resources sector is significantly smaller than in other sectors (World Bank, 2014). 
Initial level of poverty and income distribution
The effects of GDP growth on poverty reduction also seem to vary considerably across countries and over time: the initial level of poverty and the income distribution are important factors behind such variability. As demonstrated in figure II.4, the poverty reduction effect of growth seems to follow an inverted U-shaped curve with respect to the initial level of poverty across countries (World Bank, 2015). The figure shows that the percentage change in headcount poverty (defined as income below $1.25 per day) as a result of a 1 per cent increase in per capita income, or growth elasticity of poverty for simplicity, varies across countries depending on the initial poverty rate. For example, a 1 per cent increase in per capita income reduces the poverty rate by 0.5 percentage points in Uganda (UGA), which has a poverty rate of about 35 per cent, but by only 0.3 percentage points in Zambia (ZMB), which has a poverty rate of 75 per cent.
      The application of a density function approach reveals that changes in income inequality occurring as mean income grows are also important to keep in mind for understanding the effects of growth on poverty reduction (Hong, 2015). A correlation between higher levels of inequality and a lower response rate of poverty to growth has been observed for Sub-Saharan Africa (Fosu, 2009). Views are divided, however, on the issue of whether growth and improvement in equality can go hand in hand or, on the contrary, follow different trajectories. The evidence supports both types of views. A recent study by Ostry, Berg and Tsangarides (2014), which applies statistical analyses using a sample of 150 countries for 40 years, finds that reducing income inequality could contribute positively to future growth. Utilizing the same data, Hong, Li and Peng (2014) show that reducing inequality could lead to higher growth in the countries with a Gini coefficient above 40 per cent.
      In any case, economic growth supports relatively more progress towards achieving development goals when it is not only sustained but also fairly distributed. It increases individual incomes that are critical to satisfy basic needs in general, and to pay for education, health and sanitation, in particular. Increased individual incomes broaden the tax base as well, and, if private savings increase, they can potentially be a source of domestic resource mobilization for the government. The resulting tax and domestic-borrowing revenues can contribute to development if a share of them is allocated to invest in social sectors and public infrastructure, among others. This policy space will depend on the economic conditions, whether there is economic bonanza or turbulence, as further explained below.
Growth and stability period (2000-2007/8)
During the period from 2000 to 2007/8 many countries saw increasing stability along with increasing growth rates. While this was not true of all countries, it was, unsurprisingly, a common factor amongst those that were able to make more progress in achieving MDGs. Economic growth in general has been supportive of progress towards achieving the MDGs, as noted. There were a number of reasons behind the improving global macroeconomic environment including increases in investment, structural change in many economies, rising commodity prices, changes in policies, growth in international trade, rising FDI and increases in the stocks of foreign reserves in many developing countries, among others. While this chapter focuses mostly on developing countries, owing to the fact that most of the MDGs are targeted towards those countries, from a macroeconomic perspective the conditions in developed countries were important as well. Relevant links between developed and developing countries through trade, FDI, remittances and ODA were all significant with regards to economic growth in this period. 
      Macroeconomic stability in most developing countries improved, as compared with the decade of the 1990s. For example, average GDP growth in developing countries was appreciably higher in this period than in the 1990s, while the variation of GDP growth across countries was notably lower (figure II.5). Even in 2001, when median growth was lower than in any year of the 1990s, one can see that the dispersion of growth was lower than in most years of the 1990s. In particular the lower bound of the box for the year 2001 in figure II.5 is well above zero, in comparison to many years in the 1990s which were nearly zero as their lower level, meaning that while median growth may have been higher, a number of countries in those years were experiencing almost zero growth (see also figure II.7). Overall, average world gross product grew at a rate of 3.4 per cent per year between 2000 and 2008, but developing countries recorded average yearly growth of 6.0 per cent over that periodaccording to data from the UN/DESA.
      During the period from 2000 to 2007 developed economies grew at a slower, but still steady pace of 2.5 per cent per year. Even so, economic growth in developed countries in absolute terms added trillions of dollars to the world economy, which contributed to growth in developing countries as well. This resulted in considerable rises in FDI and trade (see below) as well as rising ODA and a dramatic jump in remittances.
      Domestic price stability of developing countries improved considerably since the 1990s. Inflation in most of these countries moderated significantly from the 1990s to the 2000s (figure II.6). The inflation rate in a majority of developing countries has recently been below 5 per cent, with only a dozen developing countries witnessing inflation rates in double digits (United Nations, 2015). Monetary policies were particularly important for price stability as further explained below. Meanwhile, the number of developing countries experiencing recession is also considerably lower during the period compared with the 1990s (figure II.7). 
      By other macroeconomic measures, both fiscal balance and public debt in most developing countries have also improved in the past decade. The ratio of external debt to GDP of the developing countries as a whole declined by a number of percentage points (with the exception of the Middle East and North African and emerging and developing Europe regions) and Governments managed to reduce their public total debt considerably across all developing regions (see Table II.1). Some of the changes in debt resulted from international debt relief initiatives such as the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), which have reduced debt burdens for government budget in LDCs and other developing countries. At the same time, government revenue (as a percentage of GDP) also increased across developing countries partly because of the improved economic conditions as well as policy choices of Governments (see below). It increased in developed countries, too, although to a lower extent. General government expenditure (as a percentage of GDP) decreased in most developing regions, though, excluding Latin America and the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa. Nonetheless, as will be shown below, an important number of countries, especially low-income and lower middle-income countries increased public expenditure between 2000 and 2008. Furthermore, there has been a shift in Government spending patterns as public social expenditure has increased both in absolute terms as well as relative to total government expenditures. These factors demonstrate the improving situation in the first period, which helped to provide critical policy space for countries to enact the policies that eventually enabled progress towards development goals, including the MDGs.
International drivers of growth
One of the drivers of economic growth during the first period has, no doubt, been international trade, which grew relatively rapidly, particularly compared to GDP. World imports went up by an average of 6.5 per cent per year between 2001 and 2007nearly double world GDP growth. As with GDP, developing country growth in international trade was even higher than the world average, with exports growing by 8.8 per cent per year over that same periodaccording to data from UN/DESA. Over the same period developed country trade expanded by 4.8 per cent. There were clear contributions from this broad growth in trade to developing country economic growth and hence to these countries opportunities to create space for development policy.
	There were a number of factors that contributed to high levels of trade growth in that period including trade policy changes over the past few decades, particularly those before the new millennium, as well as an increased integration of developing countries into global supply chains. Decreases in tariffs and reductions in barriers to trade with the expansion of multilateral trade frameworks and regional and bilateral trade agreements led trade growth to accelerate considerably in the period between the mid-1980s and 2000. This process continued into the new millennium, but slowed, leading to still high, but declining trade growth. In addition, greater fragmentation of production leading to increasing integration of developing countries into supply chains over the decades prior to the new millennium led to substantially higher trade volumes. This process remained strong in the period since the MDGs were adopted, but growth of trade integration has slowed.
      There was a broad based rise in almost all commodity prices over this period, with fuels, minerals and agricultural prices all reaching new highs. According to statistics from UNCTAD, between early-2000 and mid-2008, prices for all commodities in aggregate almost tripled. At a somewhat more disaggregated level there are more or less drastic changes, with petroleum more than quadrupling whereas tropical beverages only came close to doubling. Importantly for many developing countries, food prices almost tripled over this period. This significant commodity supercycle was to a large extent triggered by the industrialization of China.
      Rising commodity prices over that commodity supercycle period had a mixed effect, with some commodity exporters seeing notable benefits, while others saw pressure on their exchange rates and current account balances as a result of rising import prices. This depended to some degree on whether the countries were net commodity importers or exporters and also on the countries particular mix of commodity exports and imports. Developing countries fall across the spectrum when it comes to whether they are net commodity exporters or importers, with much of South America as net exporters, much of East and South Asia as net importers and both net importers and exporters across Africa. Both groups of countries, net commodity exporters and importers, saw notable growth over the period, but with different internal dynamics. Unsurprisingly, commodity exporters drew greater shares of their government revenue from those exports. For example, between 2000 and 2008, resources revenues rose as a share of government revenue from 20.8 to 39.3 per cent in Malaysia, from 4.1 to 22.8 per cent in Chile and from 43.2 to 67.1 per cent in Sudan (ICTD Government Revenue Database). 
      Foreign direct investment (FDI) to developing countries also grew considerably over that period, rising by 150 per cent, from $266 billion in 2000 to $668 billion 2008, according to UNCTADs World Investment Report 2015. The bulk of that FDI went to East and South-East Asia and to Latin America and the Caribbean. From a percentage standpoint, though, there were still considerable increases in FDI to Africa and South Asia between 2000 and 2008, by more than 500 and 1,000 per cent respectively. While a minor fraction of overall FDI, investment in LDCs also rose considerably by more than 350 per cent.
      There are also indications that countries accumulated reserves over this period. This occurred to the greatest degree in East Asia in dollar terms, driven by surging manufacturing exports. Thailand saw its official reserve assets and other foreign currency assets rise by 189 per cent between April 2000 and January 2008. From a percentage standpoint some other countries, including commodity exporters saw dramatic rises in their reserves. For example, Brazils official reserve assets and other foreign currency assets rose by over 380 per cent between December 2000 and January 2008 (UN/DESA calculation based on IMF data). These increases in reserves allowed these countries to weather subsequent shocks occurring during the global financial crisis and beyond. Reserve accumulation permitted policy makers the space to ensure more stable exchange rates thereby limiting spill-over effects that may have slowed growth and rolled back hard-won progress in achieving development goals.
      Over this period remittances inflows to developing countries also increased considerably; indeed, they more than quadrupled, from almost $74 billion in 2000 to $328 billion in 2008, according to World Bank data. This was important for a number of reasons, as remittances contribute to consumption and investment in developing countries, thereby reducing consumption poverty and boosting economic growth. As remittances often come in the form of foreign currency, they can also have significant effects on the exchange rate and foreign exchange reserves. In addition, evidence points to remittances as countercyclical, meaning that they can have an important smoothing effect in times of crisis (Frankel et al., 2011). Remittances have also been shown to have important impacts at both the micro and macro levels of the economy. Households that receive remittances have shown better outcomes with regards to health and education. Remittances are also associated with higher domestic savings rates and improved financial intermediation (Ratha, 2013). 
Domestic policies
There were also a number of important domestic factors in laying the groundwork for the improvements in economic growth and macroeconomic stability that broaden the space for policies that have facilitated progress towards the achievement of development goals, including the MDGs. These cover a combination of monetary and fiscal policies, as well as more specific sectoral policies. 
       Monetary policy
Monetary policy instruments and targets for an economy should be defined in accordance with the stage of development of its banking and financial system and the specific economic circumstances. This means balancing out the need for maintaining low inflation while also minimizing exchange rate volatility and ensuring that the economy has sufficient monetary resources for growth to proceed. This balance may differ depending on the level of development and the development priorities. In general, the stability engendered by these policies helps countries to enact the longer-term planning to implement development polices.
      Maintaining relatively low and stable inflation has long been an important objective of monetary policy in all countries. In the past two decades, an increasing number of Central Banks have adopted a new monetary policy framework: targeting inflation. However, a large number of Central Banks also have mandates to set other targets for monetary policy, such as full employment or exchange rate stability. Meanwhile, although short-term interest rates and open market operations have increasingly become the primary monetary policy instruments, a number of Central Banks in developing countries continue to rely on other instruments, such as reserve requirements, control of monetary aggregates and credit ceilings. These policies have made it possible to maintain relatively low and stable inflation rates as noted above (recall figure II.6). 
       Investment and sectoral policies
Policies related to investment have been another important factor in improving the growth rates of a number of countries over the past two decades. Sustained growth requires high rates of investment in productive capacities, including infrastructure, business structure, equipment and software, and research and development (R&D). The economies with sustained growth in the past decades usually maintained an investment rate of 30 per cent of GDP, or higher. For example, China maintained an investment rate above 35 per cent of GDP for three decades to achieve an average annual growth rate of 10 per cent. In comparison, the average investment rate in sub-Saharan Africa has increased from 16 per cent to 23 per cent in the past decade (International Monetary Fund, 2013), leading to an increase in the regions growth rate to 5.3 per cent, second only to that of developing countries in East and South Asia (UN/DESA data). Among other developing regions, investment rates in most Latin American countries remain below 20 per cent. As shown in figure II.8, economies that achieved an average growth rate above 6 per cent in the past two decades maintained an investment rate above 25 per cent. The figure also shows that a few economies maintained an investment rate above 25 per cent, but failed to achieve high growth, indicating that a high level of investment is a necessary but not a sufficient condition for sustained growth.
      Sectoral policies, particularly related to increasing productivity and promoting the shift from agriculture to higher productivity sectors have also always been an important aspect of improving growth prospects and reducing poverty in developing countries. For example, the remarkable achievement in poverty reduction in East Asia, including China, over the past decades, and more recently in South Asia, has been associated with policies promoting structural transformation, reallocating millions from the low-productivity agricultural sector to relatively higher-productivity manufacturing and services sectors. As a result of this transformation, a large number of farmers became factory workers and saw their productivity and earnings increase substantially (Dinh et al., 2012). 
      This is relevant in the context of general economic growth as well as for the achievement of development goals, such as MDG 1 of reducing poverty and hunger. A study by Diao et al. (2012) found that the poverty reduction effect of agricultural growth was 53 per cent to 127 per cent larger than that of non-agricultural growth. By splitting the agricultural sector into sub-sectors, the study further shows that, the poverty reduction effect of productivity growth of smallholder staple crops is greater than that of export crops. A study by Hill and Tsehaye (2014) on the poverty-growth links found that agricultural growth was significantly related to the decline in poverty in Ethiopia: zones with the fastest increase in agricultural production saw the largest decline in poverty. By contrast, growth in manufacturing and services did not exert significant impact on poverty reduction. Rwandas experience confirmed the same findings. 
      McMillan and Harttgen (2014) found that in a sample of 16 sub-Saharan African countries labour reallocation across sectors accounted on average for about half of overall labour productivity growth during the 2000s (figure II.9), though there was substantial heterogeneity across countries. Another study by Christiaensen and Kaminski (2014) on Uganda found that 70 per cent of the decline in the poverty headcount during 2005-2009 resulted from an increase in agricultural incomes of people staying in agriculture. The other one-third came from rural nonfarm diversification. Fostering non-agricultural activities in rural areas appeared disproportionately important for growth, while fostering agricultural productivity appeared disproportionately crucial for poverty reduction. Structural transformation within the rural economy (including rural nonfarm income diversification) benefited both poverty and growth.
       Fiscal policy
      Improvements in growth and stability, along with changes in governance, taxation and expenditure regimes were important to enabling a better environment for development policies during the first period. This has manifested in part through increasing revenue to GDP ratios between the beginning of the new millennium and the period before the crisis. As is apparent from figure II.10where most observations sit above the 45 degree line, most low- and middle-income countries recorded higher total government revenues in 2008 compared with 2000. In general, middle-income countries were better able to increase revenues than low-income countries over this period. 
      Overall, out of a sample of 158 countries, a majority saw revenue increases over the 2000-2008 period and most of these increases came as a result of a rise in both tax and non-tax revenue (see table II.2). Increases in tax revenue in developing countries have come as a result of a number of different factors, including a shift away from trade taxes since the 1980s towards consumption taxes (McNabb and LeMay-Boucher, 2014) and corporate income taxes (International Monetary Fund, 2011). In addition improvements in economic growth over the period also contributed to greater revenues. On the other hand, grants were a factor in increasing non-tax revenue over this period, to various degrees in some countries, but in others resource revenues provided much more of the increase in non-tax revenue. The countries seeing considerable increases in resource revenue where that revenue made up a sizable fraction of overall government revenue tend to be oil exporters and some mineral exporters. Importantly, it has been pointed out that Africa has been the region with the most rapidly growing revenue mobilization over the period 1990 to 2010 (Prichard et al., 2014). 
      The increased revenue allowed many governments to step up spending, although this was more frequent among lower and lower-middle income countries (see figure II.11). Partly in response to the MDGs in some countries, there was a significant increase in public expenditure on social protection, education, and health in low- and middle-income countries across all developing regionswhich was even maintained during and after the global financial crisis as further explained below (figure II.12). In some developing countries, mainly in sub-Saharan Africa, where low-income countries tend to be concentrated, the increase in social expenditure was substantially supported by external assistance. Interestingly, in some regions such as Latin America and the Caribbean, where the most significant cash transfer programmes originated and expanded, the increase was mostly driven by higher spending in social protection. Social protection spending is, on the contrary, rather small in low-income countries. 
      The increase in public expenditure on social protection, education and health in developing countries was clear evidence that the economic bonanza of the first period (2000-2007/8) had made some room for development policies. Social protection spending made it possible to finance a number of non-contributory schemes that enabled the targeting of people living in extreme poverty. It was also anticipated that education and health spending would have a positive and significant impact on education and health capital (Baldacci et al., 2008). Later, social protection programmes became one of the most important components of countercyclical policy responses to the global financial crisis. Overall higher levels of public social spending appear to have led to better MDG outcomes (see chapters III and IV), whether such levels were motivated by the MDGs or not, and likely helped to offset the impact of the global financial crisis on such outcomes in some countries (see below). 
Crisis and recovery period (2008-2015)
The second period (2008-2015), particularly the episode of turbulence marked by the global financial and economic crisis (2008-2009), brought about challenges that rolled back hard-won progress towards achieving MDGs in many developing countries. However, some countries were able to avoid more drastic declines or declines at all in MDG progress owing to previous improvements in conditions. This came by way of increased foreign reserves, lower debt levels, already established social spending programmes, such as conditional cash transfers, and other countercyclical measures. 
      In addition, in the aftermath of the crisis, Central Banks adopted unconventional monetary policy instruments, such as large-scale quantitative easing to directly increase the monetary base, although these efforts were mostly seen in developed countries. These efforts by developed countries central banks have helped to forestall further deterioration in these economies and thereby minimize the spill-over effects on developing countries. At the same time, there were other spill-overs as capital flows to developing countries increased as a result of the quantitative easing policies, with the ensuing risk of heightened volatility (United Nations, 2015). In spite of all the measures, the repercussions of the crisis were damaging for economic growth in developing countries and tended to be adverse for these countries efforts to pursue development goals.
Effects on economic growth and MDGs
Although the global financial crisis originated in major developed countries, the growth path of many developing countries was substantially altered. This can be illustrated through an extrapolation of pre-crisis economic growth, keeping in mind that that periods robust growth may not have been sustained in any case for a very long period of time in the absence of crises. Six years after the onset of the global crisis, total output of developing countries is far below the trend line that held prior to the crisis, with a cumulative gap (over 2008-2014) of GDP by $1.7 trillion (6.5 per cent) (see figures II.13 and II.14). The gap is about $250 billion (12.7 per cent) for Africa and $300 billion (12.5 per cent) for South Asia. The size of the gap for Africa is equivalent to the size of official development assistance (ODA) flows Africa received in the same period. 
	
      The economic downturn and the consequent increase in unemployment and vulnerable employment, compounded in some cases by retreats in social spending, caused important setbacks in the progress towards the MDGs. Estimates presented in the 2010 issue of the World Economic Situation and Prospects pointed to the possibility of between 47 million and 84 million more people falling into or staying in extreme poverty because of the global crisis (United Nations, 2010). While significant, these setbacks were not large enough to change the likelihood of achieving the millennium target of halving global poverty rates by 2015 (from 1990 levels), which was met ahead of schedule. Although developing country growth rates were lower than in the pre-crisis period, they continued to be higher than those in developed countries and a significant driver of more than 50 per cent of growth in World Gross Product (WGP), UN/DESA data suggest. Despite that, the crisis caused setbacks in the progress towards the MDGs, especially in countries that could not sustain the growing pattern of public social expenditures of the pre-crisis period. As shown below, public social expenditures in education and health lost weight within the budget in some countries as a result of the crisis. This significantly increased the challenge of achieving targets for universal primary education, reducing child and maternal mortality and improving environmental and sanitary conditions. 
      Despite increasing fiscal constraints, nonetheless, many governments in developing countries made laudable efforts during the crisis to protect the most vulnerable by directing a significant proportion of stimulus measures towards pro-poor and social protection programmes. Countries that managed to do so, such as Bolivia and Ecuador, for example, were able to somewhat mitigate the impact of the crisis on education and health outcomes, but nonetheless could not avoid certain setbacks. Accelerating progress towards the MDGs became more challenging as a consequence, both in these cases and even more so in countries that did not manage to protect social spending during the crisis. The requirements for stepping up social spending to meet the MDGs posed significant macroeconomic and financial challenges even before the crisis, but they have become all the more pressing in cases where setbacks have been the greatest (see box II.1). In Nicaragua, for instance, estimates of additional spending requirements for education, health, water and sanitation increased to about 9.5 per cent of GDP annually between 2010 and 2015 in order to meet the MDG targets, up from 8 per cent of GDP in a scenario absent the impact of the global financial crisis. In Ecuador the additional requirements are significantly less, despite a stronger drop in GDP growth, as the Government managed to protect social spending more forcefully during the crisis. 
Box II.1: Impact of the crisis and the ensuing financial challenge to meeting the MDGs
Slower or negative per capita income growth as a result of the global financial crisis caused setbacks in the progress towards the MDGs in many developing countries. The exact magnitude of the setbacks depended on country conditions. In general, slower growth affects household incomes and job creation, which will have a direct impact on income poverty (MDG 1). Less income will also affect access to social services and hence progress towards other MDGs. But that impact will further depend on the fiscal space countries have to protect spending on education, health and basic sanitation during a crisis. In cases where setbacks were unavoidable during the global financial crisis, it became more challenging for spending strategies and macroeconomic policies to accelerate progress to meet the MDGs. 
      To take account of all the interactions at work for estimating setbacks in the progress towards the MDGs caused by the global financial crisis, an economy-wide modelling framework was applied to a reasonable number of developing countries.  As indicated in the body of the chapter, both the impact of the crisis on the MDGs and the resulting greater financial challenge of countries to meet the MDGs differ widely across countries. This is illustrated further by the six country cases discussed below. 
      Under a scenario of the observed impact of the crisis on output growth and government spending during 2008-2010 and a projected slow and gradual economic recovery towards 2015, it was estimated that Nicaragua suffered a setback of 2 percentage points in poverty reduction, whereas Bolivia, Ecuador and Kyrgyzstan experienced a setback of about one percentage point (see table). In the case of Uzbekistan, setbacks for all of the MDGs have been minimal as the country barely suffered any downturn and was thus able to sustain spending towards the MDGs. In the other countries, differences in the impact on projected outcomes for primary school completion rates, child and maternal mortality and access to drinking water and sanitation by 2015 can be attributed in part to different responses to adjusting social spending during the crisis period. Bolivia and Ecuador managed to protect spending better than Kyrgyzstan and the Philippines, where setbacks have been relatively larger. Based on announced social spending plans at the time, in Nicaragua the impact may also have been less severe (as shown in the table), than in a situation where social spending had been scaled down.
      In the face of these setbacks, it was estimated that the Governments of Ecuador, the Philippines and Nicaragua would have needed to spend an additional 1.0-1.5 per cent of GDP per year between 2010 and 2015 in order to meet the MDG targets for education, health and basic services, compared with the pre-crisis scenario (see figure). In the cases of Bolivia and Kyrgyzstan, the additional cost of achieving these MDGs would have been 0.7 per cent and 0.5 per cent of GDP, respectively; the extra cost would be negligible in the case of Uzbekistan. While these additional costs may seem manageable, they come on top of the already considerable MDG spending requirements prior to the crisis (given pre-existing shortfalls). As a result, the challenge for Nicaragua would have been to increase spending for education, health and basic services by 9.5 per cent of GDP during 2010-2015. The required efforts would be slightly less, but were still of a large magnitude in Bolivia and Kyrgyzstan, while in Ecuador, the Philippines and Uzbekistan the estimated additional macroeconomic costs in these policy simulations would have been in the order of 3.0-4.5 per cent of GDP. Such impacts may have been even larger in many countries that are poorer than these lower middle-income countries. Clearly, additional costs of this magnitude may stretch government finances and could lead to steep increases in public debt or demand infeasible increases in domestic tax burdens. 
      The mood for fiscal tightening during the crisis and its aftermath took hold in many developing countries. The difficulties in most of these countries in sustaining (or increasing) expenditure patterns were caused mainly by substantial declines in tax revenue, especially in regions such as the Middle East and North Africa and sub-Sahara Africa (see Table II.1), even in the case of low-income countries which did not witness major declines in ODA. At the same time, many developing countries either had policies in place or enacted policies during and after the crisis that were more or less successful in mitigating the impact of the crisis and preventing potentially worse outcomes. It is important to draw lessons on these countries experience. 
Fiscal and budgetary policies
Fiscal policies have been critical in inducing and supporting economic growth and maintaining it during periods of economic turmoil. The mandates of fiscal policy include not only maintaining macroeconomic stability, but also providing public goods and redistributing income. Within the context of macroeconomic stability, a key challenge for fiscal policy is to reduce its pro-cyclicality and enhance its countercyclicality. For decades prior to the formulation of the MDGs, many developing countries tended to follow pro-cyclical fiscal policy: increasing government spending (or cutting taxes) during periods when the overall economy is in expansion, but cutting government spending (or raising taxes) during periods of recession (Kaminsky et al., 2005; Ilzetski and Vgh, 2008). For example, Kaminsky et al. (2005) documented that among 94 countries during the period of 1960-1999, more than 90 per cent of developing countries showed pro-cyclical fiscal policy, while 80 per cent of developed countries showed countercyclical fiscal policy. However, since 2000, an increasing number of developing countries have shifted fiscal policy from pro-cyclical to countercyclical (Frankel et al., 2011).  
      According to some studies (World Bank, 2015; Frankel et al., 2013), three major factors may have contributed to the shift toward a more countercyclical spending policy. First, robust economic growth and rising prices of primary commodities (for some countries) boosted government revenue in many developing countries in the 2000s, particularly emerging economies. Second, international debt relief initiatives such as the HIPC Initiative and the MDRI have reduced debt in LDCs and other developing countries. Third, institutional reforms, including new budget institutions, have improved fiscal management. As a result, when the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, a number of developing countries were able to adopt sizeable countercyclical fiscal stimuli in 2009-2010 and managed to reduce the shocks, which could have otherwise led to even larger and longer negative impact on growth and progress towards the achievement of development goals. 
      Developing countries reduced fiscal pro-cyclicality since 2000 by adopting a few important institutional measures, including fiscal rules, medium-term expenditure frameworks, and stabilization funds. A fiscal rule sets targets for government budgetary indicators, such as debt to GDP ratio, budget balance, expenditures, or revenues. Fiscal rules have been shown to help reduce procyclicality of government spending when implemented under the proper governance structures (Bergman and Hutchison, 2015). Since the late-1990s more than 30 developing countries have adopted fiscal rules, along with some 30 developed countries. It has been necessary to adjust some of these fiscal rules over time as certain fiscal rules may lead to more, not less, pro-cyclicality (Bova et al., 2014), particularly debt-to-GDP ratios in times of crisis. In view of this, more flexible fiscal rules with cyclically-adjusted targets have become increasingly popular in developing as well as developed economies. 
      Medium-term expenditure frameworks (MTEFs) were first used in developed countries to manage long-term fiscal policy priorities, but an increasing number of developing countries have also started adopting this framework since the late 1990s. Currently, about 70 per cent of the countries in the world have adopted certain forms of MTEFs (World Bank, 2013). The main objective of MTEFs is to establish and improve credibility in the budgetary process. Most MTEFs translate macroeconomic goals into budget aggregates and spending plans, but others could simply target aggregate fiscal goals. Empirical studies suggest MTEFs could improve fiscal discipline and spending efficiency, but the experience in this regard is not uniform across countries. For example, the experience of some African countries showed that realistic expectations of revenues are needed in formulating MTEFs; otherwise, even well-designed MTEFs cannot succeed (Holmes and Evans, 2003). A cross country empirical study by the World Bank found a significant positive effect of MTEFs on fiscal discipline and that MTEFs increased the fiscal balance at least by between 0.9 and 2.8 percentage points of GDPwith the most advanced MTEFs achieving even larger improvements in fiscal balances (World Bank, 2013). In some countries there is also evidence of the impact on debts. While MTEFs may have improved macroeconomic stability and limited the impacts from the financial crisis, their contribution to MDG achievement is somewhat more mixed (see below). However, MTEFs can reduce the volatility of social expenditures relative to total expenditures, as has been shown in the context of health expenditures (see Vlaicu et al., 2014). Lower volatility of social expenditures could be important for better weathering the impacts of external shocks. An issue is that in practice MTEFs are difficult to be fully implemented in the context of developing countries, as further explained below.
      Despite the improvement regarding the cyclical nature of fiscal policy in many developing countries, the capacity for conducting countercyclical fiscal policy remains weak in LDCs and other LICs. For these countries, in addition to the strengthening of domestic budget institutions, the improvement in fiscal cyclicality will also depend on the improvement in the predictability of ODA flows they receive (see more discussion on ODA in chapter VII).
      Fiscal policies directed towards social spending appear to also have been an important factor in mitigating the effect of the crisis on MDG progress. For example, a substantial number of countries announced stimulus measures during or following the crisis in order to offset falling growth. In a study of 182 developing countries, Ortiz, Chai and Cummins (2011) find that, on average about 24 per cent of the total announced stimulus amounts by developing countries was directed at social protection programmes, (p 10).
      Figure II.12 shows that the steadily growing pattern of public social expenditure seen before the global financial crisis was not disrupted as a result of the crisis in 33 low- and middle-income countries (for which data were available). Additional patterns are revealed when the data on public social expenditure used in the figure are further disaggregated. For example, observations above the 45 degree line in the figure represent cases of public social expenditures whose share of total public expenditure increased during the crisis (2008-2010), compared with a pre-crisis period (2005-2007). Not only does this figure corroborate that the majority of countries (20 of 33) increased public social expenditures during the crisis period, but, interestingly, most countries (21 of 33) increased their share of social protection spending in public expenditure. In many instances this was at the cost of reducing the allocation of spending to education or health owing to fiscal constraints, but this seems to have mostly been the case in countries with relatively higher spending. Even so, the trend was that public social expenditures behaved countercyclically during the global financial crisis in many developing countries, eased in some countries by the accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves, especially because there was a more urgent need to direct a significant proportion of stimulus measures at pro-poor and social protection programmes. This permitted the amelioration of important potential impacts of the crisis on the progress towards the MDGsof magnitudes perhaps similar to those estimated in box II.1.
External shock mitigation policies
As developing countries increasingly integrate their economies into the global economy, they are facing various external vulnerabilities through trade and financial channels: surges and reversals in short-term capital flows, vicissitudes of international prices of primary commodities, business cycles in the external demand from major developed countries, among others. The global financial crisis and the attendant Great Recession have demonstrated sharply all these and other external vulnerabilities of developing countries.
	The effects of external shocks can be quite damaging, particularly in small-open developing economies, and they have implications for the achievement of development goals. As shown above, the global financial crisis brought about setbacks in progress achieved towards the MDGs. There can be a number of transmission mechanisms from external shocks to economic growth. The impact is challenged through investment, exports, and private and public consumption. Mitigation policies are necessary to offset external shocks; in their absence there can be setbacks in the achievement of development goals (see box II.2)
END BOX
Box II.2: Impact of external shocks on poverty and human development goals: a simulation analysis
Nicaragua is a small and open developing economy that has historically been affected by external fluctuations. The implications of adverse external fluctuations for human development in this country can be illustrated drawing upon findings from an economy-wide modelling analysis documented in Snchez (2015). 
      The starting point is a scenario where economic and budget conditions of the 2006-2013 period remain unchanged until 2020. The exception with respect to past conditions in this scenario is that government foreign borrowing increases to finance the spending needed to meet, by 2020, country-specific targets for extreme poverty, net (on time) primary completion, child and maternal mortality, and access to drinking water and basic sanitation. In this scenario GDP growth is on average little more than 4.5 per cent per year. 
     From this initial scenario, consider the simulated impact of the following external shocks on the Nicaraguan economy and the countrys ability to meet said poverty reduction and human development targets by 2020:
     Even though these shocks are fairly modest, they have the potential of impacting GDP growth in a significant way. For example, a reduction of 2 percentage points of GDP in inflows of FDI (fdidec) depresses private investment and exports to a point where GDP growth falls almost by a quarter of a percentage point (see figure A). The impact on growth from small reductions in world prices of key export commodities such as coffee (pcoffdec) is also not negligible.
     The decline in growth has an additional impact on key determinants of human development goals such as public and private spending in social sectors and household consumption per capita. As a consequence, projected progress towards the human development targets is sluggish compared with the scenario without shocks. For example, the target for the net (on time) primary completion rate is not met under any of the simulated scenarios with external shocks, and extreme poverty increases, especially because of the oil price shock (poilinc) (see figure B). In this last case, the reduction in consumption per capita is the mirror image of household labour incomes falling owing to the slower economic growth. 
      Stabilization funds have increasingly become a tool for mitigating the volatility in commodity prices, especially in countries where government revenues depend highly on exports of primary commodities. These funds are established using public revenues from natural resources, such as oil and natural gas, and can be used to stabilize the boom and bust cycles. Some 30 developing countries have such funds, and more than a half of them have been established since 2000. Many stabilization funds are integrated with government budgets with specified rules for their accumulation and withdrawal (Bagnall and Truman, 2013). Studies show these funds can smooth government expenditure and reduce volatility (Sugawara, 2014), but the effectiveness of these funds in shielding the domestic economy from the fluctuations in commodity prices will depend on government commitment to fiscal discipline and macroeconomic management, rather than just the existence of the funds themselves (Gill et al., 2014). Chile is an interesting example of a country that has combined fiscal rules (discussed earlier) with stabilization funds through its structural fiscal balance rule, initiated in May 2000 (Marcel, 2013). The rule incorporates general macroeconomic conditions and takes into account movements in copper prices, a major export and source of government revenue. It has been cited as a major factor in the countrys macroeconomic stability through both boom times and crises. 
      With respect to capital flows, in addition to the conventional monetary, fiscal and exchange rate policies, a number of developing countries have introduced capital account management measures to contain volatile short-term capital flows. Some countries, such as Croatia, Peru, and Republic of Korea, have used macro-prudential measures to stem capital inflows and excessive credit growth. These policies include measures to maintain sound lending standards, countercyclical capital requirements to slow down credit expansion, and balance sheet restrictions such as limiting the foreign exchange positions of banks. While these measures appear to have lengthened the composition of capital inflows, the effect on total net flows was limited. For example, in Peru, which has a considerably dollarized economy mediated through the banking system, macro-prudential measures, such as limits on foreign exchange mismatches, have been relatively effective at reducing risks. In the Republic of Korea, a package of macro-prudential measures was introduced in 2009/2010 and this appears to have brought about the intended deceleration in banks foreign borrowing but did not stem the overall level of capital inflows. 
      Other countries, such as Indonesia and Brazil have used more direct capital account regulations. Most available studies find that capital account management has been effective in changing the composition of inflows away from short-term debt in many cases, but the results varied from country to country (United Nations, 2015, chapter III). More broadly, the effectiveness of measures depends on the specific circumstances of a country, including the quality of the existing regulatory framework and regulatory capacity, the structure and persistence of inflows, and the design and implementation of capital flow management measures. Capital account regulations may be particularly difficult to implement in countries where there is a large derivatives market, since speculators can often circumvent the restrictions through foreign exchange futures, options, and other derivatives. Thus some countries, such as Brazil, have implemented restrictions directly in the derivatives market, albeit at a low initial rate to test the market. Overall, there is no simple formula for effectively managing cross-border capital flows. Macroeconomic policies, macro-prudential tools and capital account regulations should be viewed as part of a package of measures that would vary in line with the specific circumstances of individual countries. 
      Developing countries are also challenged by the needs for both stability and flexibility in exchange rates. After the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, an increasing number of developing countries moved away from the fixed exchange rate regimes towards more flexible regimes. However, since the global financial crisis of 2008, there has been a notable tendency for more countries to shift away from flexible exchange rate arrangements, reflecting the recurring pressure on the currencies of emerging market economies as a result of capital flow volatility (International Monetary Fund, 2014).
      Another trend since the MDGs were adopted has been the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves in developing countries as noted above. Accumulation of foreign reserves has been undertaken in order for countries to be properly positioned to deal with shocks coming from open capital accounts and volatile international capital flows (United Nations, 2015). For example, reserves can be used to mitigate trade shocks, to refinance short-term external debt, or to deal with reversals of short-term capital flows and unwinding of carry trades. Evidence points to several of these types of factors motivating reserve accumulation over time, with different factors motivating different countries at different times (Ghosh et al., 2012).  Foreign exchange reserves continued to accumulate, even after the crisis, rising overall by about 10 times during 2000-2014, only reversing slightly since late 2014. This has strengthened the capacity of many developing countries to withstand external shocks; for example, commodity exporting countries with stabilization funds have been found to have lower government expenditure volatility, as noted above (Sugawara, 2014). In the context of the crisis, Chiles Social and Economic Stabilization Fund was able to mitigate some of the effects through countercyclical spending (World Bank and IMF, 2010). At the same time this reserve accumulation comes with costs. The build-up of reserves for self-insurance purposes is also an indication of deficiency in the current international financial architecture. It exacerbates global imbalances and systemic risks and overall it represents a net transfer of financial resources from the developing to the developed world (United Nations, 2015). 
Challenges of bridging spending gaps
Going forward it will be necessary to scale up social spending and allocate it effectively. An obvious reason is the necessity to continue building the human capital that developing countries need to create policy space via robust economic growth. Evidence points to the positive effects of social spending on economic growth. For example, using a data panel for 118 developing countries in 1971-2000, Baldacci et al. (2008) projected that education and health spending would have a positive and significant impact on education and health capital with important effects in supporting higher growth during the period in which the MDGs were going to be implemented. More recently it has been estimated that past investments in education and health during the period in which the MDGs have been implemented could lead to GDP growth gains in the range of 0.2-1.0 percentage points during the post-2015 period (Snchez and Cicowiez, 2014). Social spending needs to be stepped up also because there are existing gaps, as a result of which many developing countries have failed to achieve the MDGs by the deadline.
Macroeconomic trade-offs
Public social expenditure has risen, as noted above, but it still constitutes a small portion of the budget in some developing countries, perhaps mostly in those that most need it. For many of the low- and middle-income countries for which data are presented in figure II.15, public social expenditures tend to be clustered near the origin of the graph. About half of the countries included in the figure do not allocate more than 30 per cent of their total public budget to spending on social protection, education and health. The gaps are greater for low-income countries. Within the developing world, Latin America and the Caribbean is the region with the largest ratio of public social expenditures to overall budget expenditures at nearly 50 per cent, which is not too distant from the share in high-income countries. By and large, in all countries but those in Latin America and the Caribbean where it was already fairly important, social protection spending has been gaining importance within the budget. Spending on productive sectors appears to absorb the largest share irrespective of the developing country region (see figure II.12).
      In spite of the progress towards the MDGs and the efforts to spend more in sectors that are essential to meet these goals, at the current rate of spending and progress many MDGs, especially the health goals, are likely to be achieved globally only well beyond 2015. This is despite policies in some countries to safeguard priority social spending in times of crisis. The challenges ahead are reflected in an insufficiency of government spending that is worth nothing going forward, especially because important investments in school infrastructure, health systems, water and sanitation, and others will be required in the post-2015 period.
      Regional and global targets for health spending are not being met by a number of countries (Government Spending Watch, 2013). According to studies for 27 developing countries, additional public spending requirements for meeting a number of MDG targets in education, health, water and sanitation are estimated to range from less than one per cent of GDP to a high of 10 per cent of GDP (see box II.3). The studies warn that the financing of such magnitudes of additional public spending could impose a serious burden on countries budgets, particularly in the least developed ones. The huge size of investment requirements for some of the countries will require a financing strategy that may result in macroeconomic hardships and, depending on the financing source, could also result in debt sustainability problems. For instance, if the additional spending were to be financed through foreign borrowing, significant real exchange rate appreciation would have a negative impact on export and investment growth. Similar macroeconomic trade-offs would be induced if additional aid inflows covered the additional costs of achieving the MDGsalthough with no debt accumulation. If, alternatively, the tax burden were increased or if possible the government borrowed from domestic capital markets, private consumption or investment spending, or both, would be affected lowering aggregate growth effects. These macroeconomic trade-offs are worth studying going forward.
END BOX
Box II.3: Spending gaps for meeting MDGs and macroeconomic trade-offs 
Achieving all the MDGs by 2015 would have required a significant increase in public spending after the global financial crisis, well above the increasing levels observed in developing countries. Because of the magnitude of the additional spending requirements, there would also have been important macroeconomic trade-offs, which, paradoxically, in some cases had undermined economic growth. This can be illustrated using an economy-wide modelling simulation analysis for 27 developing countries.
      Consider a baseline scenario that delineates the currently expected pace of economic growth and existing public spending priorities and budget financing policies. Under this scenario there is substantial progress towards achieving the MDGs, but the majority of countries included in the analysis would not fully meet, by 2015, a set of targets for primary school completion, reduction of child and maternal mortality, and expanded coverage of drinking water and sanitation. 
      Because of the shortfalls, alternative scenarios are considered where countries scale up their public spending, using alternative financing sources in each scenario, in order to fully meet the targets by 2015. In ten cases, for example, the additional public spending required would be around 5 to almost 10 percentage points of GDP per year, irrespective of the financing source, equivalent to 15 to 48 per cent of total public spending per year depending on the country. The vertical axis of the figure shows the additional public investment that would presumably have been required as a percentage of GDP (during 2010-2015) to meet said MDGs.
      Different ways of financing such additional spending requirements have different macroeconomic implications. Financing the spending through domestic sources, simulating a financing strategy of direct taxation, tends to yield a less positive impact on GDP growth than does a strategy of using a foreign source of financing. The figure shows that, for each country, the observation for foreign financing is to the right of that of direct taxation along the horizontal axis, implying a lesser negative impact on GDP growth. This simulation result is due to the fact that increased direct taxation depresses private disposable incomes and thereby aggregate domestic demand. The crowding out of private consumption and investment thus depresses GDP growth, which is reflected in a reduction of private demand for, as well as provisioning of, social services. This feedback effect requires the government to invest even more to compensate for the loss of private spending in social sectors in order to ensure that MDG targets are met, thereby incurring more additional public spending. The figure shows that for each country the additional public spending in the scenario using foreign financing is below that of increased direct taxation (the vertical axis). 
      Yet there are trade-offs associated with foreign financing to be considered too. It is well known that an inflow of foreign currency may lead to real exchange rate appreciation, harming the tradable sector. This will be particularly the case when the amounts are spent on non-tradable social services, as would be required to meet development goals. The appreciation of the real exchange rate may lead to resource allocation away from dynamic export industries that will negatively affect GDP growth in the absence of an adequate policy response. The figure shows that GDP growth in the scenario of foreign financing would be lower than in the baseline for a number of countries.
      Another challenge is whether the countries can effectively realize access to alternative sources of finance and whether it is economically feasible to use it. First of all, domestic financing through taxation may not be an easy option, because existing tax burdens on those parts of the economy which are in the tax net are already considered high in many developing countries. Second, the foreign financing route is also becoming problematic. On the one hand, if this financing comes in the form of loans, then it increases the debt burden. In addition, the countries may expose themselves to currency mismatches or the effects of devaluation when borrowing in a different currency, which could exacerbate debt burdens. On the other hand, a slow recovery after the global financial crisis in developed countries is making prospects of aid and concessional financing for developing countries increasingly limited and uncertain. A feasible financing strategy would likely involve a combination of sources.
      Said macroeconomic trade-offs of financing public spending to meet development goals need to be addressed in tandem with options to achieve the rapid and sustained economic growth that is necessitated to create fiscal space and maintain solid development standards. This is necessary because better education and health outcomes are unlikely to have a positive impact on overall labour productivity (and growth) in the short run. This process takes time, as children need to go through more than one educational cycle before they become economically active. Similarly, improved child and maternal healthcare today can lead to healthier students and workers only after several years have passed. Hence, financing strategies for development goals may also pose important inter-temporal macroeconomic trade-offs. Moreover, some economies may not be equipped to absorb the increased stock of better-educated workers resulting from investing in education, which is also important to keep in mind going forward. In fact, there have been mismatches between education and the labour market in many developing countries, which due to insufficient creation of skilled jobs have resulted in youth unemployment and underemployment. Addressing such mismatches requires changes that will have to come from within the education sector (see chapter III). At the same time, broader economic policies that strengthen productive and decent employment and productivity growth will be necessary. 
Planning within a budgeting framework
The use of planning frameworks that are well integrated with budgeting frameworks is essential to: reduce spending gaps that leave development objectives unattained, minimize macroeconomic trade-offs of financing development, and, more broadly, achieve policy coherence. It was noted in chapter I that, while PRSPs and NDSs in some cases enabled the incorporation of the MDGs into national development planning, they did not necessarily guarantee a requisite fiscal envelope for the implementation of development goals. This would have required coherence and alignment between development priorities, for example, as laid out in PRSPs or NDSs, and a resource allocation or budgetary framework, as laid out in needs assessments or MTEFs. Coherence and alignment between these frameworks would in turn have required that most of the sectors identified in NDSs, PRSPs, and MTEFs had addressed the MDGs in some form or the other, not least by identifying policies and programmes that would drive progress towards the goals. 
      MTEFs predate the MDG process, but they received renewed attention in the context of the formulation of PRSPs in the early 2000s. At the same time, the adoption of the MDGs in the early 2000s, and the universal quest for larger fiscal envelopes to realize the goals and improve fiscal efficiency and effectiveness, acted as new impetus for countries to move to MTEFs. The number of countries that adopted an MTEF increased from 11 in 1990 to 132 by the end of 2008 (World Bank, 2013). It was argued that poverty reduction strategies required increased allocative and technical efficiencies in public expenditures. A government may achieve these efficiencies by integrating policy objectives in the budgetary process, by establishing clear links between fiscal inputs and expected development outcomes as well as through costing and multi-year financing (and possibly sequencing) of various fiscal outlays. MTEFs, when properly executed, could be an ideal tool for incorporating NDSs and PRSPs into a coherent, multi-year public expenditure framework. 
      However, a lack of coherence between national development planning processes and existing budgetary or resource allocation frameworks is perhaps one of the critical factors that have prevented a more adequate adaptation of MDG goals and targets to local conditions and priorities. Fukuda-Parr (2008) points to a number of PRSP countries where governments with the support of the UN Millennium Project estimated the investment needed to meet MDG targets in education, health, and water and sanitation. Despite the existence of these cost estimates, none of the countries PRSPs referred to them. These estimates were not fully incorporated into the countries planning and budgeting basically for three reasons: (i) resources could not be mobilized, (ii) the reliability of the estimates themselves was not exempt from criticism and (iii) the potential macroeconomic impact on public expenditure ceilings and aid dependence raised concerns. 
      There are relatively successful stories, nonetheless. For example, to further facilitate mainstreaming the MDGs into its Tenth Five Year Plan, Bhutan aligned national budgetary outlays with resource requirements for meeting the MDGs. This was done through a detailed costing exerciseas reported in the Bhutan Millennium Development Goals Needs Assessment and Costing (2006-2015) Report in 2006. This exercise was based on the UN Millennium Project model. Another example is Nigeria where Medium-Term Sector Strategies (MTSSs) were developed to guide the preparation and implementation of a MTEF. In 2006, this framework earmarked about 57 per cent of total capital expenditure for MDG-related sectors (Nigerias MDGR for 2010). 
      While there appear to be positive effects of resource allocation or budgetary frameworks on allocative efficiency, the effects on technical efficiency are more uncertain. Cross-country panel data estimation by Vlaicu et al. (2014) shows that MTEFs improve allocative efficiency, measured as the volatility of health expenditures to total expenditures, with reduced volatility in health expenditure and an increase in aggregate health expenditure. The effect is larger as the country goes from an MTEF to a Medium Term Budget Framework (MTBF). However, their results on technical efficiencyhow MTEFs affect programme level outputs and outcomes such as life expectancy or infant mortalityare at best mixed. It is therefore far from clear that adoption of MTEFs in a large number of developing countries directly contributed to the achievement of MDGs. This is largely because it has been difficult for most developing countries to operate fiscal policy with full completion of all the stages involved in an MTEFhence the MDG spending gaps pointed out earlier.
      It has also been observed that MTEFs alone were not delivering improved public expenditure management in countries in which other key aspects of budget management, notably budget execution and reporting, remained weak (Le Houerou and Taliercio, 2002). Furthermore, if actual budget disbursement remained unpredictableas it did in many developing countriesMTEFs merely became a conceptual framework and stakeholders lacked confidence in their medium-term projections. Moreover, MTEFs often failed to improve spending efficiencies without ensuring accountability of the budget actorsministers, parliamentarians and public officials. It was also a challenge to ensure accountability as the bulk of aid financing remained outside the purview of MTEFs, making programme budgeting extremely difficult for countries dependent on foreign aid. Similarly, MTEF efforts to achieve transparency in the allocation of resources to specific activities often became futile where overall sector policies remained unclear, inconsistent or unrealistic (Oxford Policy Management Review, 2000).
Economic policy pathways for the post-2015 period
The initial conditions at the onset of the post-2015 period will differ considerably from the conditions that unfolded early into the new millennium when the MDG agenda was adopted and began to be implemented. The period from 2000 to 2008 was characterized by broadly sustained economic growth and macroeconomic stability in both developed and developing countries, supported by the dynamism of emerging economies, rising commodity prices, increasing trade, FDI and ODA, and by generally positive world market conditions. As a consequence, policy space expanded based on improvements in government revenues, decreases in fiscal balances, lower overall debt and generally improved macroeconomic fundamentals (with some exceptions in both developing and developed countries). These circumstances were important both for spending significantly more for pursuing policies geared towards achieving development goals, including MDGs, and also for building the policy space that would subsequently be needed to deal with the global financial crisis and the ensuing recovery. 
      As a result of the improving conditions before the crisis, policies for expanding investment, smoothing shocks and dealing with downturns were also put in place; for example, many countries built up foreign exchange reserves and a number then bundled some of these funds in sovereign wealth funds. Appropriate use of commodity based funds for supplementary spending also helped to mitigate some of the shocks. In addition, some countries established fiscal rules to help reduce procyclicality of government spending. Properly executed budgeting frameworks also helped to improve policy coherence and limit macroeconomic trade-offs in a handful of countries. Macro-prudential tools have also proved useful in limiting exposure to external volatility. These have allowed many countries to enact countercyclical fiscal policies to weather the global financial crisis. For example, lower debt levels during the pre-crisis period allowed some countries to enact stimulus policies and temporarily run higher deficits to offset the effects of the crisis. This meant that, while policy space was more constrained during the crisis, the effects on the population and for the achievement of the MDGs were not as drastic as they potentially could have been. 
      The initial conditions for implementation of the post-2015 development agenda are considerably less promising when compared with those of the period 2000-2015, even if the effects of the global financial crisis are considered. The world economy today is characterized by a slow economic recovery precisely because of the crisis, which has limited fiscal space in many developed and developing countries. The economic recovery in developed economies continues to be relatively sluggish, and most developing countries are not expected to post the same dynamic growth rates they experienced before the crisis. Trade growth continues to be well below pre-crisis levels and there are limited prospects for improvement as trade integration appears to have slowed and new trade agreements are not expected to result in significant upticks in trade growth. Inward FDI to developing countries has continued to expand although at a less rapid pace than prior the crisis (UNCTAD, 2015). Commodity prices are generally lower, with some, such as crude oil and iron ore down considerably, and overall are not expected to return to previous peaks in the near future. Slowing growth in China has contributed to dampening growth prospects in other developing countries that export raw materials or intermediate goods to China. Overall investment is down across many countries, which is likely to continue to constrain growth in the future. At the same time that policy space is more constrained, many developing countries did not make the most of the economic bonanza of the period from 2000 to 2008 and built important spending gaps for achieving the MDGs along the way that are visible today. 
      Addressing unfinished business of the MDGs going forward and further implementing the more challenging post-2015 development agenda will necessitate more robust economic growth to boost private and public spending in key social sectors. In those cases of developing countries presenting important spending gaps, financing these gaps may result in macroeconomic hardships with unfavourable repercussions for economic growth. Policy coherence will be needed to allocate the resources in the most efficient way possible under a more constrained economic environment. Thus the following policy pathways are necessary going forward.
      First, the experience of the 2000-2015 period points to the general need to ensure that governments and policy makers take advantage of periods of robust growth. Not only are periods of robust growth necessary to produce progress towards the achievement of development goals, as it happened with the MDGs, but they are also critical to establish the necessary conditions to deal with future crises (which are inevitable, although uncertain) and avoid setbacks in development progress. 
      Second, in a broader sense, it will be necessary for countries to pursue adequate policies for macroeconomic stability, particularly during times of more robust growth. As observed over the period since the MDGs were adopted, this, among other broader economic policies as noted below, will help to ensure both stable growth during prosperous times as well as more stable growth during downturns.
      Third, countries will continue to need to improve the fundamental bases for weathering economic shocks. This includes ensuring adequate levels of foreign reserves and limiting external debt levels within manageable parameters. Furthermore, social safety net programmes and other countercyclical measures will need to be established and in place prior to shocks so that they can act as automatic stabilizers.
      Fourth, in order to reduce procyclicality in general, countries will need to introduce the appropriate policies including fiscal rules, medium-term expenditure frameworks, and stabilization funds. These will tend to function best when introduced during periods of higher growth so that they can lay the necessary groundwork and build up the requisite buffers to stabilize growth during downturns.
      Fifth, pursuing development goals after 2015 will demand the investment of significant public resources, especially in the least developed countries. Financing strategies will have to be devised and carefully assessed. Indeed, it will be necessary to establish the feasibility and optimality of alternative strategies to minimize negative impacts from mobilizing resources, such as crowding out private spending (if taxation or domestic borrowing are used) or penalizing competitiveness through real exchange rate appreciation (if foreign grants or foreign borrowing are the financing source).
      Sixth, developing countries will also have to work with a policy budgeting framework, with adequate linkages among policies, outcomes and outputs, to minimize the possibility of emerging spending gaps and leaving development goals unattained. This will be critical to guarantee policy coherence.
      Seventh, rapid and sustained economic growth will be required to make the financing associated with public spending more feasible. Economic policies will have to be pursued to strengthen productive and decent employment and productivity growth. These policies include infrastructure investments, credit policies and other support measures fostering investments in economic diversification towards technologies and activities that absorb larger amounts of skilled labour and reduce the vulnerability to external shocks. 
      Eight, said economic policies will further need the support of an enabling external environment, especially in the form of a stronger recovery of export demand. This in turn, however, will require continued strengthening of international policy coordination.
END BOX

Chapter III: Social protection, education and gender equality
Key messages
* Social policies used to pursue the achievement of the MDGs predate these goals in most cases; their continued use has been a confirmation of countries long-term policy commitments to poverty reduction and human development, which appeared in many countries efforts to scale up social spending.
* Social assistance programmes, the core non-contributory part of social protection, have contributed to reducing extreme poverty and making progress in other MDG areas, and have helped to mitigate the impact of crises on the MDGs. However, these programmes have typically been prioritized out of necessity and have not necessarily promoted structural transformations in the labour market or the economy at large. 
* Social insurance and other contributory forms of social protection are expected to take hold in the transition towards universal social protection systems after 2015. Because this transition will unfold as part of a long-term process, social assistance programmes will have to continue playing a critical role in the short- to medium-term. This will require addressing their implementation issues and shortcomings.
* A number of interventions have been successful in raising primary enrolment levels in developing countries and bringing universal primary enrolment closer to achievement. Many countries will need to continue to apply these types of interventions whereas those that have already reached the enrolment goals will need to focus on improving completion and quality.
* At the same time, all countries will have to continue to invest in the appropriate infrastructure and human capital to ensure the best outcomes for students. This will require efficient use of limited resources and proper data collection on students and teachers outcomes in order to be effective. Also, the labour market must have the capacity to absorb new graduates.
* There have been improvements in gender equality in many countries, particularly as a result of legal changes, but further efforts will be necessary to come close to meeting the goals. Proper enforcement of existing laws and implementation of further policies to reduce discrimination and boost equality are necessary.
* Ensuring equal access to the realms of education, politics and the labour force requires a combination of policies targeted towards girls and women at all stages of life to ensure equal representation and better chances for equal outcomes.
Introduction
This and the next chapter continue with the overview of policies that have contributed to reducing poverty and overcoming the human development challenges encompassed by the MDGs, but the focus is on social policies, rather than economic policies. As noted in chapter I, this Survey recognizes that these two types of policies in most respects are indivisible aspects of broader development policy. The Survey also recognizes the difficulty in determining exactly whether the MDGs were the main motivators of the policies reviewed. Many of the social policies under review predate the MDGs; therefore, their continued use was rather a confirmation of countries long-term policy commitments to poverty reduction and human development, which appeared in many developing countries efforts to scale up social spending.
      Ever since the MDGs were adopted, developing countries have, by and large, allocated more public spending to social protection and social sectors, although it is uncertain whether this trend was driven by the MDGs or not. Many of these countries did not cut down public social expenditures in the midst of the global financial crisis to shield vulnerable populations from the effects of the crisis, as noted in chapter II. Increased public spending has made it possible to step up efforts to make progress towards the achievement of the MDGs. The experience of the 2000-2015 period is rich with regard to social policy efforts; their successes and failures as well as their potential to continue producing development outcomes. Reviewing this experience proves valuable for drawing lessons that can be valid for completing unfinished business of the MDGs and implementing the post-2015 development agenda, as demonstrated in this and the next chapter. 
      This chapter, in particular, presents examples of some of the social policy efforts that have proven effective in making headway towards: reducing poverty and hunger (MDG 1) (third section); achieving universal primary education (MDG 2) (fourth section); and promoting gender equality and empowering women (MDG 3) (fifth section). Policies with regard to health and sanitation are reviewed in the next chapter. Policy implications for post-2015 emanating from the review of policies for each MDG area covered are presented in the last section.
Social protection for lifting people out of poverty
Globally the MDG target of reducing extreme poverty by half has already been met. Economic growth and concomitant job creation have enabled many people in the world to get out of income poverty. Social policies that target the most vulnerable populations and build and promote human capital have also played a critical role. However, more efforts are still needed to further eradicate poverty, especially in populous countries with large numbers of people living in extreme poverty as well as in vulnerable and conflict-affected countries. The proportion of undernourished people in developing regions has also decreased. Some countries have made little headway since the early 1990s, such as in Oceania, whereas others, such as in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, have made considerable progress, but are still well above the targets and are still seeing the numbers of undernourished increase owing to population growth(United Nations, 2015). 
      Social protection will be a critical aspect of the social policy efforts for further reduction of poverty and hunger going forward. Social protection floors (SPFs) and social safety nets (SSNs) are key instruments of social protection. SPFs are designed to provide universal protection to all in need of such protection, based on the human rights framework for social securityan initiative launched by the International Labour Organization in 2012 in response to the global financial crisis. SSNs could be viewed as a subset of SPFs and as part of transitory or short-term response measures to protect the poorest against shocks. They are essentially non-contributory benefits and are sometimes interchangeably referred to as social assistance policies (Smith and Subbarao, 2003), throughout this Survey. During the global financial crisis and the aftermath, for example, many developing countries governments stepped up social protection spending to shield part of the vulnerable population from the effects of the crisis (see chapter II).
      This section focuses on non-contributory social protection policies as they encompass public actions designed to transfer resources to groups deemed eligible due to deprivation defined by low income or other dimensions of poverty. These policies are typically tax-financed benefits, in cash or in kind, sometimes universal but generally targeted towards specific population groups. In developed countries these policies focus on income maintenance and protecting living standards of everyone. In developing countries, which this chapter focuses on, these policies are centered more on reducing poverty and providing support to people living in extreme poverty and other underserved populations.  
      Starting in the 1990s but accelerating in the new millennium, public social protection spending has increased in low- and middle-income countries, outpacing other social expenditures such as those allocated to education (figure III.1). This increase was rather limited in those developing regions of the world, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, where low income countries tend to be concentrated. In those regions, the financing of most of the social spending relied substantially on external assistance. The proliferation of social assistance instruments such as cash transfers explains, to a large extent, the increase in social protection expenditureswhile contributory schemes are taking more time to be developed. In fact, in some regions such as Latin America and the Caribbean, where the most significant cash transfer programmes originated, the increase in public social spending was mostly driven by higher spending in social protection. The necessity to step up countercyclical policies during the crisis was also behind the growing pattern of social protection spending, especially after 2008. Low- and middle-income countries governments are also expending relatively more in social assistance schemes because these have important synergies with education and health.
      There is an array of social assistance instruments that contribute to reducing poverty and hunger, while also promoting employment (see Table III.1). Some of these policy instruments can also strengthen the inclusiveness and equitability of economic growth because they are redistributive in nature. Because in many cases these instruments also generate positive synergies for goals related to education and health, they can often be regarded also as sectoral policies. 
Cash transfers
Different social investment programmes in the 1990s in Latin America led to what is known today as cash transfer (CT) programmes whose proliferation became more apparent in the 2000s. Cash transfers (CTs) have proven to significantly reduce extreme poverty and make sizable progress on several developmental sectors (Barrientos, 2010). Many programmes start with an unconditional cash transfer (UCT) scheme. Increasingly countries, particularly middle-income ones, are attaching some kind of conditionality, thus turning their UCT programmes into conditional cash transfer (CCT) programmes. These programmes only transfer cash to target populations who typically meet certain criteria with regard to enrolment in schooling or utilization of health services. Adding conditionality has proven to be crucial to increase cost-effectiveness and maximize synergies (Baird et al., 2013).
      A wealth of evidence shows that UCT programmes reduce income povertyfor example through universal minimum pension schemesand have synergies with a number of MDGs (see a review of studies in Snchez et al., 2015b). Although the use of CCTs is increasing, UCTs are still vital in a few countries and for particular populations. UCTs are being used more and more to target older persons and their importance is rising in sub-Saharan Africa where 37 countries had them in 2013, up from 21 just three years earlier (The Economist, 2015a). Weak government systems and institutional capacity favour the use of UCTs in many African nations because they do not require significant administrative costs and the rigorous monitoring and evaluation criteria that tend to characterize CCTs. Beyond the cost of monitoring conditions, UCTs may also have other inherent benefits over CCTs; for example, they are non-coercive and can promote choice and empowerment (DFID, 2011).
      CCTs and UCTs share a characteristic: both boost recipients income contributing to reducing income poverty and inequality. Additionally, CCTs also seek to enhance human capital by providing cash to families in exchange for their commitment to invest in education and health services. 
      Inspired by the MDGs call for reducing extreme poverty and hunger, ambitious CCT programmes to provide not only cash but also food aid to people living in poverty have been pioneered in several Latin American countries. Brazils Bolsa Familia, for example, the largest CCT programme in the world, has four sub-programmes (educational stipends to boost school attendance, maternal nutrition, food supplements and a domestic gas subsidy) that benefit around three-quarters of people living below the poverty line (Camargo et al., 2013; Hall, 2006). The programme has secured food for mothers and children, improved the quantity and diversity of food consumed, and boosted the growth and nutritional status of children. Bolsa Escola, its largest component, has had a positive impact on school attendance, with 50 per cent of benefits reaching the two lowest income deciles (Graciano da Silva et al., 2011). More broadly, a wealth of evidence for other Latin America countries shows clear impacts of CCTs in terms of reducing poverty and inequality, increasing school enrolment and attendance as well as preventive health care visits, and boosting childrens nutrition and health in general (Levy and Schady, 2013; World Bank, 2013c; Ranganathan and Lagarde, 2012; Hall, 2006). The role of CCTs in promoting gender equality and empowering women has also been apparent, with some of the outcomes including higher labour market participation rates and greater feelings of empowerment (Soares and Silva, 2010). Interestingly, environmental conditional cash transfer (ECCT) programmes are providing direct transfers to communities and families with land titles in the Amazon basin in exchange for the protection of large areas of tropical forests and ecosystems (da Conceio, 2014).
     The benefits of CCTs extend beyond Latin America. For example, the Pantawid Pamilyang Filipino Programme is a cornerstone of the Governments social protection strategy. It has boosted enrolment in primary education as well as the long-term nutritional status of young children (World Bank, 2013b). In Pakistan, the Punjab Female School Stipend Programme has increased enrolment of eligible girls in middle school, while participating girls have also delayed marriage and have had fewer births by the time they are 19 years old (Alam et al., 2011). In Malawi a CCT scheme based on school attendance has also contributed to changing sexual behaviour with important outcomes, including a reduction in the prevalence of HIV, early marriage and teenage pregnancy among schoolgirls aged 13-22 years (Baird et al., 2009). Sub-Saharan African countries have been piloting community-based targeting programmes which use community members to identify worthy recipients. These programmes have been found to be effective in solving inclusion and exclusion criteria problems, while addressing poverty at a rate equal to, or better than, traditional CCT schemes (Davis et al., 2012).
Additional schemes of social assistance
Where CTs programmes are not widely used, smaller SA programmes have been worth pursuing. For example, social protection spending may be low in sub-Saharan Africa, but a new wave of SA programmes indicates that there has been a move towards more regular programmes that provide income transfers as well as access to and utilization of social services in low-income countries of this region (Nino-Zarazua et al., 2010). In-depth assessments of these programmes are yet to come.
      Subsidies have also been given to small farmers to buy fertilizer and seed at a rate far below the market price. In Africa, this strategy has guaranteed a return on investment of farmers living in poverty in the form of larger output yields per unit of grain used and a reduction of economic insecurity and vulnerability (Adesina, 2010). Some social programmes provided subsidized essential goods to targeted households aiming at food security. In India, for example, the Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS) is the largest food security programme in the country, accounting for about 1 percent of GDP in 2006 (Ihsan Ajwad, 2007).
      In-kind transfers were one of the main forms of social assistance in Latin America until the 1970s and many countries still use them. Food programmes, in particular, have targeted households living in poverty and school children by providing soup kitchens, basic staples or nutritional supplements to mothers and babies, and food-for-work programmes for which participants self-select to work for low compensation (Ferreira and Robalino, 2010). These programmes range from in-kind food rations that household members can collect in certain shops (Tortivale in Mexico), public clinics (Programa Nacional de Alimentacin Complementaria in Chile), schools (School Cafeterias in Costa Rica; Perus Desayunos Escolares), to food stamps (Food Stamp Programme in Jamaica; Bono Escolar and Bono Materno Infantil in Honduras). School feeding programmes often operate through public schools in neighbourhoods with high incidence of poverty so they have important synergies in areas such as attendance rates, nutrition, and improved cognitive performance, among others. Nonetheless, transfers in kind such as food have high operational and administrative costs related to procurement, transportation, and the logistics of distribution.
      Workfare programmes provide a cushion against unemployment risk by offering monetary compensation for emergency or short-term work in certain sectors such as agriculture, public infrastructure construction, and others. Wages are set at a level that, while they help participants and their households to avoid hunger, are low enough to prevent the programme from attracting other low-productivity workers from their main occupations. Even so, some of these programmes are very ambitious with regard to their coverage. For example, Argentinas workfare programme Jefes y Jefas de Hogar had 1.2 million recipients by 2006 (equivalent to 6.4 per cent of the economically active population). The Rural Employment Guarantee Programme of India (NREGA) created about 2.5 billion work-days for 50 million households in the years between 2010 and 2014. Not only has this programme reduced extreme poverty but it has also scored human development benefits in the localities where it has been implemented (Snchez et al., 2015b, Box 3). 
Implementation issues, shortcomings, and solutions
While they have proven effective for reducing poverty and vulnerability, the social assistance instruments described above present problematic implementation issues and shortcomings that have challenged their effectiveness. For example, some have questioned their long-term financial sustainability, while excessive reliance on instruments such as CTs may lead to neglect of necessary investment in basic long-term social infrastructure. It has also been argued that CTs may create disincentives to work, perpetuate dependency, and suffer from improper client selection, inadequate monitoring mechanisms, and lack of transparency. There are also issues of overlap and inadequate design of various programmes. For example, the expansion of poverty reduction programmes in Sub-Saharan Africa has often been almost entirely funded with international aid; as a result, their design often reflected the priorities of international organizations. Some programmes also risk promoting fragmentation of social assistance. 
      There is also a broader issue relative to the merits between targeted and universal poverty reduction programmes. Apart from the problems of improper inclusion and exclusion, targeted programmes may harm social cohesion and stigmatize the recipients (UNRISD, 2010). However, in spite of the shortcomings, these types of programmes will still be necessary in post-2015 as long as there are vulnerable populations that cannot benefit from broader economic, social and environmental policies. 
      Simple and innovative solutions are available to address some of the problematic issues of social assistance policies. Most of these are aimed at increasing effectiveness and require adequate monitoring and evaluation. For example, in Bogot, Colombia, a CCT programme boosted attendance during the school year but re-enrolment rates were low. In this case, a shift in the timing of the hand-outwith-holding part of the regular payment until just before the start of the school yearboosted enrolment sharply again (The Economist, 2014). In some cases, an approach that would focus on targeting the family as opposed to individuals could also help eliminate unjustified overlaps of programmesthus improving targeting and effectiveness (World Bank, 2013a). This is particularly true if these transfers do not worsen the intra-household income distribution given that the patterns of resource allocation within households may marginalize allocations towards some household members such as women, the elderly, children, persons with disabilities, and so on.
      There are experiences of countries that have created a unique registry system for all policies in order to improve efficiency. For example, the Bolsa Familia programme in Brazil and programmes in at least 22 other developing countries have started to list the registration of recipients online to help reduce fraud, while 230 programmes in over 80 countries verify identities with biometric information, some keeping track of the recipients of social spending (The Economist, 2015a). 
      Social assistance programmes are also more effective when they are supplemented with supply-side interventions. A number of studies suggest that learning outcomes for children brought into school by CCTs are mixed. It is equally significant that while CCT programmes improve enrolment rates, they can also be factors leading to larger student-teacher ratios, thus handicapping the quality of education (Hasan, 2010). In this case, then, increasing the number of teachers becomes a necessary intervention to translate larger enrolment rates into good education outcomes. There have also been CCT programmes paying women to deliver in health facilities but this has not necessarily translated into a reduction of maternal mortality partly because of the low quality of healthcare at institutions (see chapter IV).
      Offering opportunities for a broader, more active and coordinated approach than simply providing CCTs or other social benefits is also critical to the impact of social assistance. For example, Chile Solidario is a pioneering programme using social workers to seek out people chronically living in poverty and encourage them to enrol in training schemes, take up social benefits and raise their aspirations (The Economist, 2015b). Training programmes to boost skills are promising and can be critical to gradually move towards more developed schemes of social promotion but, as with all other social assistance schemes, they will also require careful design and implementation. 
Interventions to ensure the attainment of primary education
In their efforts to meet the targets for universal primary education (UPE), developing countries have, by and large, focused to a much greater degree on enrolment as opposed to completion. These countries enrolment rate went up to 91 per cent by 2015from 83 in 2000 (United Nations, 2015, p. 25). This masks disparities, though, as some developing countries had already achieved the goal of UPE in the years prior to the Millennium Declaration (UNDP, 2010a). Some of these countries raised the targets for MDG 2 to include more years of education or other educational goals (Snchez et al., 2015a). At the same time, other countries significantly lagged behind in meeting the goal well into the 2000s. Given the starting position of many developing countries, particularly those in sub-Saharan Africa, it is logical that there has been greater focus on raising enrolment rates, while less attention has been paid to increasing completion rates. Hence, while enrolment rates have improved in many regions, completion rates have mostly stagnated. On the other hand, many developing countries are on track to achieve gender parity in primary education. Still, overall, the world will not reach the goal of universal primary education in the time planned as progress began to stagnate after 2007 (United Nations, 2015). Sub-Saharan African countries in particular will have to continue work to expand basic education whereas other regions that have made better progress can begin to focus on expanding education at all levels in the post-2015 era. Overall, with regards to the goals for education, [t]here is evidence that the world will have advanced by 2015 beyond where it would have been if the trends of the 1990s had persisted, (UNESCO, 2015, p. 43). 
      Some of the interventions that were most effective in the past still appear to provide significant social outcomes per education dollar as further explained below. The approaches to raising enrolment may start by undertaking legislative reformsin most cases to guarantee free and compulsory education. Fifteen countries in Sub-Saharan Africa have adopted legislation abolishing school fees, either through constitutional guarantees or other forms of legislation, since 2000 (ibid.). Furthermore, there are a wide variety of factors involved in boosting primary school enrolment and completion rates, the most important of which are discussed in this section. In general, the most effective interventions appear to be a combination of appropriate number and form of facilities, particularly infrastructure; well trained staff, who are incentivised and monitored to minimize absenteeism; the relevant amount of instruction for both students and teachers; elimination of school fees; provision of teaching materials; proper attention to each students needs and abilities; well-fed and generally healthy students; well-educated families; involved communities; and proper attention to gender balance (Evans and Ghosh, 2008).
      Sometimes these interventions feature as part of social protection policies, although they are more often education sector policies; or sometimes the two types of policies are integrated. Moreover, interventions geared towards prioritizing girls as well as health and nutrition-related programmes are also important for education outcomes and will be discussed in the next sections and chapter IV. A relevant example is in Ghana where a programme targeted disadvantaged schools with interventions such as providing potable water and free meals combined with the provision of deworming and eye-screening (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012, Box. 5.1). Overall, deworming has been found to be one of the most cost-effective interventions for raising school attendance (Dundar et al., 2014; Kabaka and Kisia, 2011; Evans and Ghosh, 2008). Yet, it is not enough to have these types of programmes in place if they are not executed properly; they must have the appropriate outreach and awareness strategies as well as funding and political support. This relates to the governance issues discussed in chapter VI.
Outcomes of spending on education
Many countries have undertaken comprehensive programmes to improve education outcomes, which have sometimes been supported by enacting legislative reforms in the first place. These programmes required increased public spending (see chapter II). In spite of the limited resources in developing countries, primary education appears to have provided the maximum social outcomes per education dollar (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012). The increased spending on education programmes not only has enhanced enrolment but it has also resulted in millions of new teachers trained and tens of millions of children receiving free textbooks (Dundar et al., 2014). 
	A decade since the MDG were formulated public spending per student in primary education appeared to be highly correlated with higher primary completion rates across countries (figure III.2). While there is some variation in outcomes by spending level owing to differences in historical, social and governance structures, and effectiveness in general, the overall trajectory points to a relatively strong connection between completion rates and education expenditures. Interestingly, public spending per student in primary education seems to be effective, including across upper middle income countriesa pattern not observed for public health spending (see chapter IV). At the same time, while increased per student spending in primary education up until around US$1,000 raises completion rates, additional per student spending beyond that level do not seem to increase completion much further and could be rather allocated to higher education levels or other social sectors (see figure III.2). A number of lower middle income countries where public spending per student in primary education has not increased much, have also reaped important improvements in primary completion. These countries initially faced more challenging human development gaps than countries with higher incomes and therefore have seen improvements in education outcomes without having to spend relatively as much. Lower income countries have also benefited relatively more from ODA, an important share of which was not necessarily tied to budget support early into the new millennium, and hence has not been accounted for as part of public spending.
School infrastructure
One of the most common and most effective interventions to raise enrolment undertaken in many countries has been the construction of more school facilities to get closer to the school age population. Botswana, Nepal, and Tanzania, for example, have all constructed thousands of new classrooms, particularly with the intention of reducing the distance that students have to travel to school (UNDP, 2010b,c). Improving the accessibility or adequacy of school infrastructure for students in general and girls in particular, is another critical measure to boost enrolment. Gendered sanitation facilities are an important example, particularly with regards to girls enrolment and completion. Other interventions that have contributed to boost enrolment by girls are introduced below, under the gender equality section. Another example comes from Bangladesh where the special needs of children with disabilities are being addressed through the construction of ramps in schools (Snchez et al., 2015b).
	Community or village-based schools also have considerable benefits for enrolment, progression, construction cost and the ability to reach underserved populations. Albania, Bangladesh, Benin, Egypt, Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, Mali, Mauritania, Nepal, Zambia and Zimbabwe, among others, all have variations on community schools, including community budgeting, school rehabilitation and management. In some cases, such as in Bangladesh and Nepal, committees directly responsible to parents, students and local citizens manage the schools (Dundar et al., 2014, Box 9.2). Not only have community schools helped to boost enrolment but they have contributed to reach underserved populations in a number of countries such as Colombia, Egypt, Guatemala, Pakistan and Zambia, among others (DeStefano et al., 2007). In Cambodia, the Highland Community Programme has been effective in improving access and completion rates for indigenous children who are primarily ethnic minorities. This programme has established community governance with locally elected school boards comprised of village elders and has trained local teachers selected by the community. The educational process has also worked to introduce bilingual programmes to ease the transition between local languages and Khmer (UNDG, 2010).Village-based community schools in Afghanistan increased average enrolment by 42 percentage points (with relatively higher percentage for girls) and raised test scores for all children in the village (Burde and Linden, 2012). 
      The construction of many schools must have had a positive impact on MDG 2, especially in LDCs, and should continue to feature prominently among development efforts to cover important remaining deficits. At some point there are likely to be diminishing marginal returns from some of the most effective strategies, such as new school construction, necessitating shifts in policy strategy. That point is still far off in many poor countries that face high population growth rates or where sizable parts of the population live in remote areas and may remain unreached for some time.
Adequacy of staffing, training and retention programmes
The first step in addressing the human resource aspect of education begins with ensuring an adequate number of appropriately educated graduates, which sets the baseline from which to draw teachers (Mulkeen, 2010). This will require further investment in all levels of education in order to raise the number of graduates that are qualified to be trained as teachers. Because investing in education to increase the number of teachers may take time, as further explained below, the next, if not simultaneous important intervention to providing adequate primary education is using more immediate solutions to increase the appropriate number and qualifications of staff to provide instruction as well as operate the institutions. Examples of programmes to tackle this issue include the establishment of training institutes in provinces (Central African Republic); progressive financial incentives to attract qualified teachers to otherwise underserved locations (The Gambia); direct hiring by local schools to select teachers from the local communities (Lesotho); and self-selection by candidates willing to serve in rural areas (Malawi) (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012, Box 3.1). Ethiopia is working to improve the qualifications of the existing teachers through improvements in on-the-job training as well as summer programmes for teacher training (UNDP, 2010a). Appropriate salaries and proper incentives can be important for ensuring effective teacher performance and reducing absenteeism (Snchez et al., 2015b). In India, individual performance incentives resulted in significant improvements in student outcomes (Dundar et al., 2014, Box O.8).
      Some other examples of successful teacher hiring programmes to increase primary school coverage include seeking contract teachers to address the gap between the ratio of civil servant teachers and students as a result of rising enrolment rates (Niger), recruiting volunteer teachers (Senegal and Ghana), and involving parents associations in the hiring of teachers (Madagascar). In many instances of these or similar programmes, the government has subsequently taken steps to attempt to integrate these teachers into the civil service (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012, Box 4.1; UNDP, 2010c). Other successful ways of improving teacher coverage, particularly of underserved groups, include recruiting women and representatives of marginalized groups (of people with disabilities and ethnic minorities in Nepal); establishing programmes whereby teachers are selected to travel with migratory pastoralists (Ethiopia); training teachers on adapting to diverse student needs (Lao PDR), and using mobile classrooms to reach street and working children (Egypt) (UNDP, 2010b; UNDG, 2010). 
      Nonetheless, even when teachers are assigned to schools, there are often serious problems with teacher absenteeism, especially in LDCs. Useful interventions to deal with this issue include community involvement in teacher monitoring and performance-based incentives that hold teachers or school principals accountable for students learning outcomes. For example, the Gambia introduced cluster monitoring supervision units to regularly check teacher attendance records resulting in a substantial rise in teacher attendance (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012, Box 5.4). Similarly, the School Based Management (SBM)a system of decentralization of control to local schoolshas been shown to increase the accountability of teachers to schools (Barrera-Osorio et al., 2009). Evaluations of programmes that have SBM components in El Salvador and Honduras show relevant changes in teacher behaviour and consequently improvement of student outcomes (Rogers and Vegas, 2009). The use of social audits focused on educational attainment and literacy rates in India through the collaboration of government and citizens organizations have been an important tool in monitoring the effectiveness of education at a cost lower than more extensive surveys (UNDP, 2010a).
Elimination of school fees and other costs
Free primary education has a measurable impact on years of schooling (Bhalotra et al., 2014). The reduction in fees for school and materials, particularly textbooks, and reducing opportunity costs has important implications for enrolment and attendance (Snchez et al., 2015b). A number of developing countries had all eliminated school fees at the primary level by 2010 (UNDP, 2010ac; UNDP, 2008). Burundi and Mozambique, for example, saw considerable progress after dropping school fees in 2004, with enrolment rising from 54 to 95 per cent between 2004 and 2010, and from 70 to 88 per cent between 2004 and 2008, respectively (UNESCO, 2014b). The elimination of school fees in Mozambique also included capitation grants to local schools to purchase learning materials as well as free textbooks for all primary school students, which helped to offset some of the revenue local schools may have lost (UNDP, 2010a; UNESCO, 2014b). Given that eliminating school fees can put pressure on government budgets, a number of countries such as Benin, Ghana and Lesotho have implemented the fee reduction in stages in order to mitigate fiscal pressures (UNESCO, 2015). In addition, Burkina Faso, Ghana and India have all taken steps to increase the provision of free textbooks (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012, Box 5.1; UNDP, 2010b). Improving the availability and quality of educational materials features among the effective interventions that have helped Chile become a leader in educational achievement in Latin America (ODI, 2014). As part of its decentralization programmes, Kenya devolved school management, including the supply of free teaching materials, to local schools (UNDP, 2010c). 
School feeding programmes
There is strong evidence for the effects of school feeding programmes on raising enrolment, although the effect on academic achievement is still inconclusive. A total of 19.8 million school feeding beneficiaries in 63 countries were reached out by the World Food Programme in 2013of which almost a half were girls. As a result, a greater number of parents were able to send their children to school (United Nations, 2014). The Food for Education (FFE) programme in Bangladesh has boosted school participation rates (Meng and Ryan, 2008) and other feeding programmes have increased enrolment, especially of girls in Burkina Faso and increased attendance rates in Uganda (World Bank, 2012). Overall school feeding programmes have obvious synergies with the hunger reduction targets of MDG 1 as they raise childrens and their siblings consumption (Snchez et al., 2015b). Some school feeding programmes also have synergies with MDG 3 as they have also boosted girls enrolment and completion rates (Gelli et al., 2007).
Issues relatively neglected in the policy agenda
In their efforts to achieve universal primary education, many developing countries have focused to a much greater degree on enrolment as opposed to completion. Greater focus on completion is necessary and calls for extra efforts to gather data on out-of-school students. Without better knowledge of the conditions preventing children from attending or staying at school, it will be difficult to introduce proper measures to address those constraints. The fact that many students are not staying in school is still a serious issue in some countries, particularly those affected by conflict, and it has been resistant to efforts to reduce it for some time (Snchez, et al., 2015b; UNESCO, 2014b). Because the reasons explaining school dropout can vary from country to country, addressing them will necessitate various levels of adaptation of programmes to reach those students (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012). An example of a more generally beneficial intervention is increasing the share of female teachers which was shown to increase retention of students in a cross-country analysis of 54 developing countries across regions by Mapto-Kengne and Mingat (2002). Outreach, extra-curricular activities and financial incentives were successful in increasing retention rates of Roma children in Bulgaria (UNESCO, 2015). In addition, monitoring of currently enrolled students through tests of literacy and subject knowledge must be expanded to ensure that they are learning and retaining the material studied. 
      In addition, the issue of child and adult literacy has often been overlooked. While the vast majority of programmes focus on childhood education, many students complete primary education without reaching important literacy and numeracy benchmarks (Unterhalter, 2014). Low literacy rates raise the issue of the quality of schoolingwhich will be a significant hurdle for further efforts to improve education going forward (UNESCO, 2014b). This underlines the need to further improve student/teacher ratios, teacher training levels, pedagogy methods and teaching materials, issues noted above.
      Furthermore, it is also important to pay more attention to early childhood development (ECD) as this has important synergies with educational attainment and, in particular, with early childhood nutrition. Pre-primary education is a valuable way for improving general education levels and literacy as well as boosting the effectiveness of subsequent primary education. There has been a considerable rise in enrolment in pre-primary educationup by 64 per cent between 2000 and 2012albeit from an initially low level (UNESCO, 2015). Nonetheless, many developing country governments already possess stretched education budgets that limit their efforts to provide pre-primary education. Enrolment rates differ considerably across regions, with many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa enrolling less than 20 per cent of children, despite considerable progress (ibid.). While a number of countries have instituted mandatory pre-primary education for which fees have been mostly eliminated, many pre-primary programmes in these countries still charge enrolment fees (ibid.). This may alleviate government budget pressures but, at the same time, it puts pressure on households finances. A possible solution to education budget constraints can be found in community-based pre-primary education, which some countries (Cape Verde and Guinea) have provided at a much lower cost than traditional publicly funded programmes (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012).
      Issues of adult literacy are particularly problematic for women, especially in rural areas and in Sub-Saharan Africa, given the broader implications for health, development and womens empowerment. A number of countries across the world have undertaken campaigns to boost literacy with varying degrees of success. The Ibero-American Plan for Literacy and Basic Education of Youth and Adults (PAI) covering 17 countries in Latin America and Spain has helped 5 million people gain basic literacy between 2006 and 2012. At the same time, this has had limited impacts on the literacy rates of these countries given the number of illiterate adults. In addition, the Cuban Yo S Puedo (YSP) literacy campaign has reached 7 million people in 30 countries in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa, although there are debates about its efficacy (Hanemann, 2015).  While overall statistics from all regions point to rising levels of adult literacy since the adoption of the MDGs, much of that appears to be as a result of increased education of previous generations. In other words, the rising levels of adult literacy do not tend to result from the success of adult literacy programmes, rather they result from increases in education that current adults received as children, prior to reaching adulthood. A rare exception to this has been Nepals National Literacy Campaign Programme, which actually managed to raise literacy of adults over time (UNESCO, 2015).
      Overall the focus on expansion of education has overshadowed issues of distribution, particularly for girls, rural students, children with disabilities and indigenous populations. Part of the problem is that such issues of distribution have been hidden by the level of aggregation of available statistics. Unfinished business of the MDGs will require continued reinforcement of the existing data infrastructure to bridge such important data gaps (recall chapter I). Nonetheless, there have been programmes to reach underserved populations. For example, Panama has established adult literacy programmes in indigenous areas, Costa Rica has established schools tailored to indigenous people, and Venezuelas Misin Guaicaipuro programme has taken steps to ensure rights to education for indigenous people (UN/DESA, 2014). 
Education and the labour market
Policies described above have helped developing countries to build a stock of better-educated workers. However, an important trend underlined in chapter II is that some economies have not been equipped to absorb an increasing stock of better-educated workers. In fact, there has been insufficient creation of skilled jobs in many developing countries, resulting in youth unemployment, underemployment and skill mismatches in the labour market. These problems are particularly problematic for the achievement of development goals, as they can result in rising inequality of income and opportunities, more poverty, and ultimately lead to the perception that the return to education is low. Chapter II suggests economic policies that can contribute to eliminate such mismatches. At the same time, there should also be initiatives to inform future job seekers about the needs of the labour makers and programmes that address issues of relevance of education and training taught by the education system for the labour market. 
      In research on the connections between investment in education and outcomes in the labour market, Snchez and Cicowiez (2014) simulate a scenario for four developing countries whereby public spending increases from 2005 to meet, by 2015, a number of MDG targets, including UPE. By comparing this scenario to a baseline projecting past trends, the authors find that the employment of better-educated workers that would be newly-available as a result of past investments in education generate productivity and GDP growth gains after 2015. However, it is also found that some economies would not be equipped to absorb the increased stock of better-educated workers; in fact, unemployment of such workers increases at some point compared with the baseline (figure III.3). 
	Addressing these issues requires understanding the features of the education systems and the structure of the labour markets and how they interact. In developing countries there are considerable differences in the degree to which graduates of higher education work in the formal sector vis--vis the informal sector. For example, 88 per cent of 25-34 year olds with higher education in Malawi work in the formal sector, versus only 20 per cent in Guinea (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012). These differences may come as a result of the ability of the labour market to absorb the skilled graduates, which will require further efforts to integrate those graduates appropriately.
      Some countries are already addressing these issues. An example of a programme to offset the mismatches between education and the labour market is Ghanas National Youth Employment Programme (NYEP) (UNDP, 2010c). Proper dissemination of information regarding the labour market can also be beneficial. Alignment of higher education programmes with employers needs can produce more employable graduates and ensure that students have relevant expectations about the labour market. Public funds can be an important method for connecting post-primary education with areas that are short of skilled workers (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012). In Kyrgyzstan, the Second Education Project is working to improve the relevance of the education system to the state of the economy (UNDP, 2010b).
Bridging gender gaps to empower women
Many regions have improved gender balance in key areas and overall gender parity in primary education will have been achieved by 2015 (United Nations, 2015, p. 29). Even so, there are still large gaps between male and female enrolment at higher levels of education, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, and substantial differences in the share of women employed outside the agricultural sector across different regions. Women are also much more likely to have part-time employment compared to men and are seriously unrepresented in the political realm. Initiatives at the national level described here, covering legislative changes, education, the labour market, the political realm, and other issues, still hold most potential for helping countries address said gender gaps beyond 2015.
Legal changes and womens rights for gender equality
Frequently efforts to improve gender equality since the MDGs were formulated and adopted in countries have come in combination with legal changes, either meant to roll back previous restrictions or to enshrine legal protection for certain rights for women. A number of countries have put legal structures in place, aimed at moving towards gender equality. Overall a majority of countries now have provisions to protect womens rights, including 143 countries with constitutional guarantees of womens rights and 125 with laws to prohibit sexual harassment as of 2014 (UN Women, 2015). Although the outcomes of such laws and strategies have led to some progress, many disparities remain (UNDP, 2010a). It is critical to ensure that new laws emerging from these efforts be reinforced with political support and complementary measures.
      The outcomes go beyond gender equality. In Morocco, the Family Code introduced in 2004 has raised the legal age of marriage to 18, which can have important impacts on outcomes for health goals by way of reducing early childbearing (ibid.; Bharadwaj, 2015). The new code also addressed issues of property sharing and inheritance and legalized the initiation of divorce proceedings by women. Another example comes from changes in Ethiopias family laws enacted in 2000. After raising the minimum age of marriage and allowing women to work outside the home without the possibility of denial by their spouses, economic participation by young single women age 15-24 increased considerably between 2000 and 2005. Overall Ethiopia saw significant changes in womens employment, such as working in occupations that employed more educated workers, in paid and full-time jobs, and generally in occupations that were outside of the home (Hallward-Driemeier and Gajigo, 2013). Across the world, 132 countries had equalized the age of marriage by 2014, but there are far fewer that have taken similar steps to enact equalizing family laws or repeal discriminatory provisions (UN Women, 2015). 
      Womens rights are critical to ensure gender equality and they generally find necessary support in the rule of law. In fact, efforts to boost gender equality need to be taken on and maintained for their own sake on the basis of human rights as they may require special interventions. In more general terms it will be necessary to combine efforts to improve womens empowerment and other processes as no single effort will produce the necessary conditions for full equality. For example, efforts to improve womens economic position require both economic development and endeavours to strengthen womens empowerment as neither leads to the other in isolation (Duflo, 2012). As further noted below, policies for the sake of only increasing womens participation in the labour market may not have expected outcomes if the right to quality employment is not taken into account.  
      In a number of African countries, customary lawswhich often accord fewer rights to women in areas of adoption, marriage, divorce and inheritanceoperate alongside statutory legal structures favouring equal rights. In this sense, grassroots womens groups in a number of African countries have undertaken important steps in improving womens land and inheritance rights. The efforts include the engagement of communities to change perceptions and ensure that womens claims are adequately addressed (Lawry et al., 2014).
	
      There are also useful examples of existing projects that could help to meet expanded targets for gender equality as part of the post-2015 development agenda such as successful interventions related to ending violence against women, including sex trafficking and sexual and other types of exploitation. Programmes in Bangladesh, Colombia and Uganda have helped to improve awareness of gender-based violence and coping mechanisms, sensitizing elected representatives to these issues (MDG Achievement Fund, 2013; Abramsky et al., 2014). In Malawi a programme has worked to address gender-based violence against women with HIV/AIDS as well as communication strategies and HIV risk awareness (UN Trust Fund to End Violence Against Women, 2014). Interestingly, soap-operas (Latin America) as well as documentaries, radio programmes and online platforms (Cambodia) have been used to expose and prompt dialogue on the dangers of sex trafficking, exploitation and other human rights violations against women (ibid.). 
      More broadly, womens health during pregnancy and childbirth is another important basic human right. Ensuring that women are treated properly throughout the pregnancy and birth process is becoming a more important issue as it has been noted as a barrier to access (see chapter IV).
Gender equality in education
In general, there has been relatively good progress on raising enrolment rates for girls in many developing regions owing to a variety of interventions including: schools targeted to girls; proper infrastructure such as gendered sanitation facilities and schools in closer proximity to the villages where girls live; CT programmes and scholarships targeted towards girls; and dormitory facilities for girls, particularly at the secondary stage and above. In Malawi, a CCTregarded earlier as a social protection interventiontargeted towards girls has boosted enrolment, raised re-enrolment of dropouts and subsequently reduced the dropout rate of enrolled students (Majgaard and Mingat, 2012, Box 3.2). 
      Unterhalter et al. (2014) also reinforce the idea that school proximity is especially important to girls, with important examples of community schools that require less travel time. For example, community schools in Afghanistan that required less travel time reduced security risks and raised parents likelihood of allowing girls to attend school (UNESCO, 2009). The construction of girls dormitories in secondary schools has also helped raise enrolment and retention rates in Ghana (UNDP, 2010b). Girl-friendly schools that provide school meals to children living in poverty and vulnerable communities have helped Egypt become one of the few countries where girls are more likely to complete primary education than boys (UNDP, 2010c). These girl-friendly schools also had facilities that were close to villages, primarily female teaching staff, class hours that allowed girls to participate in household activities, and free tuition. 
      Another key aspect of girls education is the appropriate teacher training that has a basis in gender equality, which has been shown to help reduce dropout rates and educational outcomes. Overall female teachers are shown to have significant impacts on girls learning, which will be important to take into account for efforts to recruit more teachers in the post-2015 period. The development of girls clubs has also had relevant impacts on a variety of issues including education, reproductive health, gender-based violence and gender equality in general (Unterhalter et al., 2014). 
      Community involvement has also been important in increasing girls school enrolment. In Benin Mothers Clubs have helped raise educational awareness and boosted girls educational registrations (UNDP, 2010b). Nepal has implemented the Welcome to School (WTS) initiative to enrol thousands of new students, over half of which were girls. These efforts involved coordination between the government, communities and various forms of media to increase awareness and outreach (UNDP, 2008). 
Womens participation in the labour market
Actions by government ministries geared towards empowering women, government employment programmes that hire significant proportions of women, womens employment organisations, efforts to balance womens work and other obligations, and general investments in education have resulted in important gains in the labour market. Yet, in spite of the progress, more women are still in positions of vulnerable employment than men, and their work in childcare, agriculture, trade, home production and other occupations such as waste picking is not considered to be part of the formal sector (ILO, 2012a). 
      Nonetheless, there are experiences pointing to a more adequate and fair participation of women in the labour market. Programmes in India such as Self Employed-Womens Association (SEWA) (Blaxall, 2004) and NREGA (Snchez et al., 2015b) had considerable impacts on womens employment. Other examples of successful employment programmes targeted towards women include the Rural Maintenance Programme (RMP) in Bangladesh covering an average of 60,000 destitute women per year (UNDP, 2010a). Moreover, Bangladeshs government has promoted womens economic equality by withdrawing a ban on womens employment abroad and building capacity in the Ministry of Manpower Development and Export to provide security to women workers in the mid-2000s (Snchez et al., 2015b). South Africas Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP) has targeted a certain quantity of jobs towards women and has also mandated equal pay for equal work (UNDP, 2010a;  Devereaux and Solomon, 2006). In Egypt there has been a significant increasealmost 70 per centin the number of women members in six Farm Associations (FAs) targeted by the Pro-poor Horticulture Value Chain in Upper Egypt (SALASEL) Joint Programme (United Nations, 2014b).
      An issue to be considered with regard to employment programmes is the nature of the recruitment process. For example, Rwanda had far better success attracting women through programmes that had information and recruitment programmes specifically geared towards women (Devereaux and Solomon, 2006). The nature of the work to be undertaken and whether there is the perception of gendered work roles matter as well. For example, the Jefes y Jefas de Hogar Desocupados Programme in Argentinaan expansion of the social safety net in response to the economic crisis of 2001was originally targeted towards male household heads, but had a 69 per cent female household heads participation rate. This was due to the fact that many of the jobs were more attractive to women, for example because they covered working in community kitchens (ibid).
       
      There are also issues with womens time constraints such as expectations about childcare and housework that are often not taken into consideration when initiating these programmes geared towards women. A potential solution was implemented in Ethiopia as part of the Employment Generation Scheme whereby women were allowed to work shorter hours in order to allow them to complete other tasksalbeit this could potentially enshrine gender differences in wages (ibid). Community childcare centres in Colombia were shown to have significant impacts on womens labour force participation rates, particularly for low income women (ILO, 2012a). 
      There are a number of benefits and synergies resulting from increases in womens employment, particularly in connection with education (Snchez et al., 2015b). In Mexico, general investment in education, without a specific gendered focus, had positive effects on reducing gender inequality in education, which subsequently increased female labour force participation rates (Creighton and Park, 2010). 
      For synergies between MDGs 2, 3 and 7, the introduction and expansion of access to cleaner and more reliable fuels has created income-generating opportunities for women across many African countries. In addition, it has saved women considerable time that they spend fetching and procuring and transporting fuel, which can now be used for education, formal employment or other entrepreneurial activities (UNDP, 2010b). Similarly, the cisterns programme as part of the Fome Zero programme in Brazil has freed women from the duty of fetching water from distant sources and freed up time for education and other activities (UNDP, 2010c). 
Women political representation 
The importance of womens representation in political office is demonstrated by evidence
that women parliamentarians are a critical component of adequately addressing gender issues
as parliaments with higher percentages of women are more likely to address womens issues
(Ballington, 2008). Women face a number of initial constraints to entering politics: gender discrimination, psychological barriers on the part of candidates, a lack of political will to change gender balances, a lack of political networks, incumbency issues, security issues, and post-conflict democratic concerns (whereby women are often sidelined from transitions processes unless parties actively recruit them) (UNDP and National Democratic Institute for International Affairs, 2012). The most effective and relevant interventions to raise the representation rates have included quotas for women at various levels of government and special groups or wings within political parties devoted to womens issues. There are also a number of strategies to overcome the often lack of necessary funding for women participation in politics, such as fundraising networks geared towards women candidates; internal party funds dedicated to women candidates; subsidies to women candidates either from the party or from national political organizations; limits to campaign or nomination expenditures; allocation of public funding to political parties with specific portions to women candidates; allocation of specific funds to training women; and examination of party budgets through a gendered framework (ibid.). 
      Two strategies for womens quotas stand out: for candidates or for reserved seats within the legislative body. The former usually manifests itself as party quotas for the number of women candidates on party or electoral lists and 50 countries have already legislated such quotas (ibid, p. 24). Some countries such as Armenia have also had some success in boosting the number of women in parliament by first working to implement voluntary quotas at the party level, which then subsequently led to changes in legislative quotas. In other countries such as Cambodia, India, Mexico, Morocco, and South Africa, parties have also established internal quotas for women, particularly for governing boards or other executive committees.  There have also been steps to create womens wings within parties such as the Womens Secretariat of the FLMN in El Salvador and the National Secretariat for the Political Promotion of Women in the National Action Party (PAN) of Mexico. There is also interesting evidence for differences in womens priorities when they are in positions of power. In Indian village councils women were more likely to invest in improving drinking water resources whereas men were more likely to invest in irrigation and roads (Chattopadhyay and Duflo, 2004). This may be related to the areas in which the different genders operate, for example fetching water is most frequently a womans job in these areas.
Limited policy coherence
The approaches to gender equality described above have enabled importance advances in the efforts to achieve gender equality and empower women since the MDGs were adopted in countries. Nonetheless, these approaches have, by and large, not been broad enough to recognize the trade-offs of pursuing them. Improving in one area, such as political representation, has not automatically led to advances in other areas, such as literacy. For example, Mongolia has performed well on gender equality in education, but has not performed nearly as well on measures of economic and political equality despite having laws enabling womens representation in government (Khan and Aslam, 2013). Mozambique has performed relatively well on the political front but still struggles with a low rate of female literacy. On the other hand, Vanuatu has comparatively high rates of female literacy, but had no female parliamentarians as of 2014. Likewise, while many countries have a minimum legal age at marriage of 18 years, many also permit child marriage if there is parental or guardian consent (United Nations, 2013).
Policy recommendations
The policy interventions identified and discussed in this chapter have featured prominently at different stages in the period since the MDGs were formulated and adopted. The evidence supports the numerous ways in which these interventions have been critical to making headway towards reducing poverty and hunger, achieving universal primary education, and promoting gender equality and empowering women. Recommendations regarding those policies which still hold great potential to address unfinished business of the MDGs and pursue a broader sustainable development agenda are summarized as follows.
Enabling the transition towards universal social protection
Social protection will feature prominently in the post-2015 development agenda. The proposed SDGs foresee the implementation of nationally appropriate social protection systems for all, including floors, and a substantial coverage of the poor and the vulnerable (goal 1.3). Social protection policies are also seen as an essential conduit to eliminate gender inequalities and improve equality in general (goals 5.4 add 10.4). They are also expected to result in spill-over effects for other goals. 
      The expectation is that countries that require it can make a transition towards developed universal social protection (USP) systems. For developing countries this will be a challenging endeavor in many cases, especially for low-income countries where social protection systems have not yet been developed on the basis of a solid contributory system. Social assistance programmes, which are non-contributory, form the most important component of social protection in most developing countries, as noted. 
      Social assistance has typically been prioritized out of necessity, particularly when the state of the labour market and the overall economic and social situation has not often lifted enough people out of poverty. These policies do not necessarily promote structural transformations in the labour market or the economy at largefor which some of the economic policies discussed in chapter II are better suited. As countries develop in the post-2015 era, social insurance and other (including new) contributory forms of social protection should be expected to take hold in the transition towards USP systems. Yet, because this transition will unfold as part of a long-term process, social assistance programmes will unavoidably have to play a critical role in the short- to medium-term. This will require addressing their implementation issues and shortcomings. The following policy recommendations are worth considering: 
      First, the design of social assistance programmes needs to be tailored to specific development and institutional conditions of individual nations. For example, CCTs with improved monitoring and evaluation mechanisms have been more effective in middle-income countries. Community-based targeting schemes and unconditional or low-conditionality programmes are better suited for low-income countries.
      Second, the myriad small social assistance programmes should be consolidated into a single one in order to standardize practices, reduce duplication and improve efficiency. 
      Third, efficiency could be enhanced through the use of a unique registry system for all programmes as well as biometric information to keeping track of beneficiaries in the case of very large programmes.
      Fourth, focusing on the family as opposed to the individual can help to eliminate unwarranted overlaps of programmes, provided that a fair intra-household resource allocation of resources and consumption can be ensured.
      Sixth, supplementary supply-side interventions are also necessary to improve effectiveness. For example, CCTs can boost enrolment but simultaneous supply-side efforts are needed to increase the number of teachers to avoid low teacher-students ratios. 
      Seventh, programmes should encourage beneficiaries to enroll in job training schemes and eventually incorporate them in the labour market, whereby they can contribute to develop a contributory base to sustain a truly universal social protection system.
Scaling and upgrading proven interventions in education
Relatively modest increases in expenditures in primary education still impact enrolment and completion rates in a significant way. The implications are twofold. On the one hand, there is room for considerably improving education outcomes despite limited resources, particularly in low-income countries. On the other hand, proven interventions such as construction of schools, increasing the number of teachers, elimination of school fees and other costs, and school feeding programmes, and others, do still pay off. 
      Nevertheless, spending more and better in primary education should still feature in the post-2015 efforts towards ensuring that all girls and boys complete free, equitable and good quality primary education. Spending more is a necessity as population growth will continue to put considerable pressure on education systems, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. Spending better will require devoting more attention to quality issues of primary education, including the issues related to the completion rate given that much progress has been made in achieving the quantitative goal of universal primary school enrolment. Spending more and better should be aimed at upgrading proven interventions and some policy pathways developing countries may think of in this regard are as follows.
      First, upgrading existing schools and services and curricula should be the focus where school access and coverage is nearing sufficiency. Upgrading sanitation facilities and accessibility will be particularly critical to improve enrolment and completion, especially as more girls and children with disabilities would be brought into schooling. Building schools in communities or villages generally boosts enrolment and reduces dropout rates, especially of girls, as they require less travel time. The point of diminishing marginal returns from upgrading facilities will require shifts in policy strategy, but it is still far off in low-income countries that possess high population growth rates or sizable populations living in remote areas that may remain unreached for some time. 
      Second, the post-2015 development agenda will posit universal secondary education as a goal. School fees and other costs to education such as textbooks, uniforms and other related materials should be eliminated to the greatest degree possible not only in primary education but also at the secondary education level in countries where they are still common. 
      Third, continued efforts are also needed to reduce opportunity costs for school attendance in primary as well as secondary by adjusting the school schedule and location to specific circumstances.
      Fourth, to increase the availability of good teachers, secondary and tertiary education has to be improved and teacher training facilities have to be upgraded and expanded including at the community level. Training programmes that teachers can go through while teaching can help to raise the level of education of both teachers and students and result in greater teacher effectiveness.

      Fifth, making salaries more competitive and putting in place a better structure of incentives and career development opportunities will be essential to retain effective teachers.
      Sixth, monitoring and evaluation with participation of community representatives need to be strengthened across education systems in order to address a variety of issues including absenteeism and lack of effort by teachers; tracking out-of-school students, both those that have dropped out and those that never attended; and monitoring the effectiveness of education.
      Finally, there are broader policy implications from the associations between education and the labour market. The fact that many economies are not equipped to absorb the increasing stock of better-educated workers in which they have been investing calls for expanding programmes to make connections between education and the labour market. Next to economic policies (see chapter II) there should be initiatives to give future job seekers the knowledge and skills demanded by the labour market. At the institutional level, aligning the educational system with the labour market will be a necessity to produce graduates that have the skills for the existing and new industries. There should also be greater efforts to increase secondary enrolment as the education system and the economy as a whole must be made to match each other. These challenges call for greater coherence between economic and social policies.
Strengthening the gender equality and development interface 
The approaches to gender equality reviewed above hold great potential going forward. However, they should be designed and implemented not only for the sake of reducing gender gaps, but also as a means to achieve development. Womens political participation can further enhance investment in human development priorities, while inclusion in decision-making can have important impacts on sustainable projects. Womens access to land and agricultural output has important implications for food security. Increased participation by women in the labour force has important effects on economic growth, which feeds back into the achievement of other development goals. Policies for achieving progress in education and health also have impacts on gender equality.
      Strengthening the gender equality and development interface will require addressing issues of existing approaches that may have diminished outcomes.  Importantly, policy makers should make efforts to better understand potential feedbacks between these approaches and ensure there is coherence between policies and womens rights. Going forward the following policy pathways are important to keep in mind.
      First, a combination of legislative and non-legislative measures will continue to be necessary to enhance gender equality, particularly with regard to property and family rights and political participation. 
      Second, further legislative measures and adequate enforcement of these are necessary to raise the quota of women in political representative bodies, in corporate boards, and in other economic, political, and social organizations.
      Third, it will be important to translate formal rights regarding gender equality (declared through legislation or other means) into actual practice, through appropriate publicity, opinion creation, public mobilization, and enforcement. Legal changes enhancing womens right to ownership and inheritance have to be accompanied by programmes ensuring that the changes develop roots in the wider culture and become part of the social conventions and norms of behaviour.
      Fourth, record keeping necessary for properly establishing womens property rights should be ensured.
      Fifth, systematic steps will be necessary to guarantee that womens work, regardless of the sphere of activity, and including work in family farm, household activities and child-rearing, and work in various informal sectors, is valued appropriately. 
      Sixth, more attention must be paid to potential conflicts in the outcomes of policies aimed at gender equality. These policies should be balanced across its different dimensionsincluding education, health, employment, ownership, and political participation. This will necessitate better use of the inter-linkages among them and recognition of the central role of economic empowerment to be achieved mainly through expansion of formal employment and promotion of self-employment opportunities for women.
      Seventh, increased monitoring and evaluation will be necessary to follow the progress made in implementing policies promoting gender equality. In particular, it will be necessary to be alert about possible conflicts that these policies may generate either across gender groups or across different human development goals. Prompt actions will be necessary to resolve these conflicts when they arise. 

Chapter IV: Health policy interventions and systems
Key messages
* Countries have made impressive headway towards the achievement of health MDGs. Progress on the most prominent fronts has led other previously overlooked issues to move to the forefront. For example, the reduction of deaths in children under five years of age but older than a month, has unmasked the issue of neonatal mortality. 
* A number of preventive and curative policy interventions have contributed to this progress; most of them were developed as part of a long-term process that predates the MDGs, but Governments have stepped them up more vigorously to pursue the achievement of the MDGs. 
* Alas, the health MDGs are unlikely to be met globally by 2015; there will be unfinished business with regard to neonatal mortality, infectious diseases, and nutrition deficiencies. Policy interventions to tackle these challenges need no reinvention but they need to be more coherent and effective. At the same time, health systems need significant strengthening. 
* Greater policy coherence and effectiveness will require: that policy interventions of one strategy do not detract from others; an adequate interface between health policies and budgetary frameworks; careful analysis of effectiveness of policies before implementing them, considering issues of context, target population, scale and cost, as well as starting conditions and their monitoring to detect changes that imply reassessment of policies.
* Strengthening the health system in developing countries will demand: adequately addressing the shortage of skilled health personnel; building more health facilities while improving non-health infrastructure as well (transport, water and sanitation); and positioning the health system as core social institutions that is deeply embedded in the social, political and economic context of local and national settings. 
* Investment and operating costs involved in improving the functioning of the health systems will be high. External assistance will be critical for countries that do not have enough domestic resources to finance the spending required. Vertical interventions should continue to be harmonised with the horizontal health system so that the former do not weaken the latter and instead strengthen it.
Introduction
The health of people in the world has improved markedly since 2000. The world has seen a reduction in under-five, maternal and malaria-related mortality rates and the number of new HIV/AIDS infections, as well as an increase in the number of lives saved through improvements in testing and treatment of tuberculosis. The progress on the most prominent fronts has led other previously overlooked issues to move to the forefront. For example, the reduction of deaths in children under five years of age but older than a month, has unmasked the issue of neonatal mortality which was invisible early in the 2000s. This progress has been reflected in the headway that countries have made towards the achievement of the health-related MDGs since 2000. 
      A number of preventive and curative health policy interventions have contributed to this progress and this chapter aims to review them and draw lessons from this review. Most of these interventions were developed as part of a long-term process that predates the MDGs. However, Governments in developing countries have used them more vigorously with the aim of making progress towards the health MDGs; as noted in the previous chapter, public social spending has increased in developing countries since the early 2000s . While health interventions have been important in explaining past success, health outcomes have also, to a large extent, been determined by the functioning of the health system. Policy interventions and health systems are connected through feedback relationships. 
      A review of health policy interventions and related lessons as presented in this chapter is important for a number of reasons. Although some individual developing countries have been successful, the health MDGs are unlikely to be met globally by 2015 and there will be unfinished business. Health challenges confronted by the MDGs will feature among the health challenges of the post-2015 development agenda. Diseases such as pneumonia, diarrhoea and malaria alone continue to account for about one-third of deaths among children under five, many under-five deaths still occur in children already weakened by undernutrition, and many pregnant women continue to face serious constraints to improve their nutrient intake, especially in low-income countries (United Nations, 2015; UNICEF, 2013a). These challenges are compounded by the urgency of tackling the problem of neonatal deaths. Likewise, it is important to scrutinize the limitations of the health system that have held back the effectiveness of health policy interventions in helping achieve progress towards the health MDGs.
      The review and examples of health interventions presented in this chapter focus on measures that have proven effective in making headway towards reducing child mortality (MDG 4), improving maternal health (MDG 5), and combating HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases (MDG 6) (second section). Policies to expand access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation (MDG 7, target C) have also been critical for achieving health goals but these are under review in chapter V. The review of health policy interventions is followed by a discussion focused on the constraints of health systems and examples of measures that have enabled Governments to overcome them (third section). Broader issues of governance and institutions that also affect health policiesand development policies in generalare discussed in chapter VI. Conclusions and recommended pathways for policies going forward are summarized at the end of the chapter. 
Proven health policy interventions
A number of effective, and in most cases affordable, policy interventions have been used by countries nationally and locally to pursue the achievement of health goals. These policies are summarized in Table IV.1. They exist as a result of a long-term process that, beginning in the early 20th century and escalating markedly in the 1950s and subsequent decades, evolved from disease control to more comprehensive and integrated approaches. Accordingly, cost-effective solutions are being more combined with community participation, inter-sectoral collaboration and incorporation into general health-system delivery (UNICEF, 2007). 
      A wealth of evidence supports that these interventions are effective in preventing and tackling the causes leading to child and maternal deaths as well as other key diseases covered by the MDGs (see Snchez et al., 2015). There are also numerous synergies among the different interventions for health goals (see Table IV.1). The remainder of this section reviews some of the main policies as well as their outcomes and synergies. It also discusses some health spending issues which turned out to be very important for policy implementation. 
Health spending and resource mobilization
Public health spending in low- and middle-income countries shows a growing trend ever since the new millennium began (see figure III.1 in chapter III). Some countries even set concrete spending targets at the regional level in Africa and also at the global level as part of a World Health Organization Initiative (Government Spending Watch, 2013). In many developing countries, health spending by regional and local governments outpaced central government health spending (Fan and Glassman, 2014), which points to the importance of local governments in the implementation of health policies (see chapter VI). These trends of public health spending reflect the increased efforts at both the national and international level that have made a considerable difference in ensuring that the relevant policy interventions are incorporated into prevention and treatment programmes. Although public spending has not increased as much as needed to meet the MDGs (see chapter II), countries with high public health expenditure per capita have generally tended to perform relatively better in any of the indicators associated with the health goals (see figure IV.1, for an example on the infant mortality rate).
      An important success of the MDGs has been in mobilizing more funds for health needs particularly in low-income countries and Africa. Bilateral and multilateral donors as reported by OECD increased their assistance for health goals from $4.1 billion in 1995 to $23.4 billion in 2013 (see figure IV.2). The increased ODA for health was part of the reason public health spending has increased, as noted above. 
      The increased assistance for health purposes was also associated with the emergence of several Vertical Funds, dedicated to specific health objectives. The most prominent among these are the Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria (GFATM), the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI Alliance), and UNITAID. These are public-private partnerships that raised and disbursed substantial amounts of aid for health, stemming from traditional bilateral aid, private sector and philanthropic sources and innovative financing mechanisms (see chapter VII). They are called vertical funds, because they conceptually divide the healthcare into vertical slices rather than horizontally by level of care, and because they focus their interventions predominantly on a few specific diseases. The health interventions financed in part by these vertical health funds had significant positive impact; notably, there has been a marked increase in global immunization rates (see figure IV.3). 
      The aid channelled through GFATM, GAVI and other channels, however, accounted for a small portion of the overall expenditure on health in most developing countries. It is mostly in sub-Saharan countries that they constituted a sizable part of overall health spending (United Nations, 2012). At the same time, vertical health funds, due to their narrow focus on particular diseases, led to some distortion of health priorities for many countries (MacKellar, 2005). As can be inferred from figure IV.2, HIV/Aids accounted for almost half of the total increase in aid for health between 2002 and 2009. Spending increases for malaria, the health workforce, basic health and medical care, and reproductive health each account for roughly 10 percent of the increase. Overall, 33.3 per cent of aid for health went to HIV/Aids in 2013 (from almost 41 per cent in 2011).
      Measured in DALYs, HIV/Aids, tuberculosis and malaria account for 5.2 percent, 2.7 percent, and 4 percent of the total disease burden in low-income countries, respectively (WHO, 2008). In comparison, diarrhoea alone represents 7.2 percent of DALYs, and perinatal and maternal conditions account for 14.8 percent. In other words, vertical funds have not been allocated to tackle the most important global health concerns. Similarly, vertical health funds ignored non-communicable diseases, which however represent almost a third of the disease burden in developing countries (Nugent and Feigl, 2010). 
Interventions to reduce child mortality
The increased allocation of resources for the health sector has made it possible to implement key interventions for reducing child mortality, including immunization, programmes that improve nutrition, measures to curb ambient and household air pollution, and antibiotic and rehydration therapies to treat pneumonia and diarrhoea. Interventions for meeting other health goals are also critical to avert child deaths as well as for engaging multiple sectors outside health (Kuruvilla et al., 2014). 
	A wealth of evidence supports that immunization substantially reduces the burden and the number of deaths caused by deadly childhood diseases such as diarrhoea, pneumonia and measles (see Snchez et al., 2015, for a review of medical literature). Countries that have increased coverage with the measles containing vaccine (MCV1) have, by and large, witnessed reductions in child mortality (see figure IV.4). The benefits seem to be more concentrated in a number of lower-middle and low-income countries. Because of its cost-effectiveness, immunization programmes received increasing funding from bilateral donors through the GAVI Alliance, as noted. 
      However, it is problematic that immunization still does not reach many children that reside in the poorest, most marginalized populations that are hard to reach. Some efforts have succeeded in overcoming the barriers to expanding immunization to underserved populations. National immunization days (NIDs), for example, proved very successful over the years in helping to reduce and, in some cases, eradicate polio in a number of countries. NIDs are effective because they allow for both massive outreach and economies of scalefor example when skilled professionals supervise a team of volunteers, especially for oral polio vaccine.
      The importance of strengthening immunization delivery at the district level has been underscored, including through identifying and solving local issues, organizing regular outreach vaccine delivery services, and involving communities to ensure adequate functioning of immunization services (WHO, UNICEF, World Bank, 2009). Another strategy is integrated child health events which integrate immunization activities with other services provided by the health system. In this case, any contact that a health worker has with a child or mother at a health facility becomes an opportunity to check immunization status and, if need be, to administer vaccines. 
      The reduction in child mortality observed over the past 40 years has been negatively correlated with undernourishment (Iqbal and Kiendrebeogo, 2014). The nutritional status of children is directly influenced by food but there are also other important determinants such as the provision of adequate general health services; a healthy environment with access to safe water and basic sanitation; good hygiene; early and exclusive breastfeeding, among other appropriate maternal care practices; and micronutrient supplementation (see Snchez et al., 2015, for an extended review of evidence for these factors). The increased availability of clean drinking water and sanitation (see chapter V) has also been shown to help prevent infections and diarrhoea, thus leading to better nutritional outcomes for a given nutrition supply (Charmarbagwala et al., 2004). 
	Many countries have increased their rates of exclusive breastfeeding through legislative changes, distribution of breastfeeding related training materials to paediatricians, establishment of mother-baby lactation centres, and significant efforts to improve awareness through outreach campaigns via a variety of media sources (UNICEF, 2013b). Combining facility-based services with community participation has proven to work by reaching targeted children that most need micronutrients such as vitamin A and Zinc. The participation of female community health volunteers (Nepal) and efforts to fill vacancies of supervisors and front-line workers as well as boosting their skills and improving their motivation (Maharashtra, India) are measures of programmes succeeding in increasing the coverage of Vitamin A (ibid). Integrated child health events such as NIDs have also helped to support high coverage of vitamin A supplementation in Zimbabwe, Nepal, Nigeria and a number of other LDCs (UNICEF, 2007). 
      Air pollution is a concern in a number of developing countries as this causes deadly respiratory diseases such as pneumonia; fortunately, it is preventable. The study by Niessen et al. (2009) for 40 developing countries, which accounted for 90 per cent of pneumonia child deaths, finds that the use of low-emission biomass chimney stoves and cleaner fuels are cost-effective and can lower pneumonia incidence by 50 per cent (the attributed burden for indoor air pollution). The concern is that chimney stoves may not completely eliminate indoor pollution if there is substantial leakage into the room with some smoke returning into the house from outside (Smith et al., 2011; Smith, 2006). The use of stove or fuel interventions producing lower average exposures than chimney stoves (e.g. improved smokeless stove) needs to be expanded in countries where populations are heavily exposed to biomass fuel air pollution. The cost of investing in cleaner fuels or new stoves could be offset by spill-over effects such as time saved looking for firewood or other biomass fuels. 
      In the event of disease, treatment becomes a necessity. Both oral and parenteral antibiotic therapies are cost-effective and safe in the treatment of severe pneumonia in children (Rojas-Reyes and Granados Rugeles, 2009; Wardlaw et al., 2006). Only one third of children with pneumonia received the antibiotics they needed by late 2014according to WHOs Fact sheet N331. Wardlaw et al. (2006) identify various factors preventing the expansion of the coverage of antibiotic interventions, which developing countries would need to address going forward. In particular, large-scale implementation of antibiotic treatment is still viewed as costly because of the weak health systems and poor supply and logistic chains. Concerns have also been raised about the low-technical level of community health workers administering antibiotics to children with pneumonia. Lastly, although there have been efforts to include community-based approaches, these programmes have often been small-scale and fragmented, with the community and health-facility components not adequately integrated. 
	
      Rehydration therapy with intravenous fluids or oral rehydration substances (ORS) is the critical intervention to treat diarrhoea. ORS is among the most cost-effective interventions in treating diarrhoea. Countries adopted the MDGs at a time when programmes earmarked to control diarrhoeal diseases through oral rehydration therapy (ORT) and other key interventions had already resulted in important reductions in the number of deaths attributable to diarrhoea among children under five (Victora et al., 2000). Even so, not all children in the developing world with a diarrhoeal disease receive the appropriate treatment. Measures to overcome the constraints to expanding ORT to treat diarrhoea should add to those seeking to expand the coverage of antibiotic interventions against pneumonia going forward.
 
Interventions to improve maternal health
There has been progress in maternal health at the global level. While many developing countries could not achieve the 75 per cent reduction from 1990 to 2015 needed (globally) to meet the maternal mortality target of MDG 5, at the same time maternal death is a rare event in a number of other developing countries. The interventions contributing to this progress include those that have improved maternal nutrition, promoted attendance to antenatal check-ups, and integrated family planning and reproductive health in policymaking. Delivering these interventions in a timely and adequate manner has necessitated a well-functioning health system and interventions at the community level (see next section). Social protection policies and efforts that improve education outcomes and address gender inequality issues have also mattered to maternal health, as noted in chapter III.
	
      The interventions include, among others, the provision of weekly iron and folic acid supplements (WIFS), multiple micronutrient supplementation and balanced-protein energy supplementation to women of reproductive age (WRA), all of which contribute to better health outcomes for both mothers and newborns. They can especially reduce the risk of anaemia during pregnancy, although their impact largely depends on the method of service delivery. A review of eight of 10 WIFS programmes in six different developing countries reports that in many instances the traditional approach of accessing non-pregnant WRA and adolescent girls through health clinics proved unfeasible. WIFS were more successfully introduced through institutions such as schools or factories and by mobilizing womens unions or community groups (WHO, 2011). Yet, programmes like these will only succeed in having an impact if they are expanded to cover women on a universal basis. A national nutritional anaemia-control programme targeting adolescent girls in Maharashtra (India), for example, performed poorly in urban-slum areas where coverage was lower compared with tribal and rural areas (Deshmukh et al., 2008). Following the logic of integrated child health events can be useful to ensure that any contact that a health worker in this case has with a pregnant woman also serves to check her nutritional condition and, if need be, administer the required supplements. 
      The World Health Organization also recommends a minimum of four antenatal care visits to ensure the well-being of mothers and new-borns; when this minimum is reached or surpassed, countries tend to have lower maternal mortality rates (see figure IV.5). However, only 52 per cent of pregnant women had the recommended number (or more) of antenatal care visits during pregnancy in 2014, albeit this was an increase from 35 per cent in 1990 (United Nations, 2015). 
      Access to antenatal care is seriously constrained by inadequate health infrastructure in many developing countries and this inadequacy will take a long time to be resolved (see next section). Additional solutions need to be implemented in the meantime, taking advantage of the fact that most women innately worry about the progress of their pregnancy. It has been found that attendance to antenatal care increased in countries such as Tanzania and Kenya with the use of an antenatal attendance card that facilitates prompt care in case of complications later in the pregnancy or ensures that women can attend a health facility to deliver (Pell et al., 2013; Mrisho et al., 2009). The existence of adequate monitoring systems and the integration of maternal and child health care are indispensable to engage women in antenatal care. An effective measure has been the move from using manual records to IT-based Mother and Child programmes. Along these lines, a programme in Oman, for example, resulted in impressive reductions of maternal and child mortality; the UN awarded and distinguished it as one of the two best innovative practices in public governance in 2013 (see Snchez et al., 2015, Box 4; UN/DESA, 2014b). 
      Universal access to reproductive health is also critical and was incorporated as part of MDG 5 in 2005. Targets on contraceptive use, unmet need for family planning and the adolescent birth rate were adopted in 2007. There has been progress with regard to these targets across developing regions, with countries making most headway by 2010 showing lower mortality rates (see Figures IV.6-IV.8). A wealth of research reviewed in Snchez et al. (2015b) supports these correlations. 
      The benefits start with the prevention of unintended and high-risk pregnancies. Subsequently, evidence shows that providing universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reducing fertility rates increases parents chance of escaping poverty; allows families to invest more in their childrens nutrition, health, and education; and boosts incomes due to life cycle, distributional and intergenerational benefits (Snchez et al., 2015; UN/DESA, 2014a). The prevention of early childbearing is critical to avoid child malnutrition, missed opportunities at school and work, the consequent intergenerational transmission of inequality and poverty, and the forestalling of social mobility, as a vast evidence for developing countries demonstrates (ibid.). 
      Higher levels of contraceptive use in areas in Bangladesh, for example, led to lower levels of unintended pregnancy and thereby lower levels of abortion and maternal mortality (Rahman et. al, 2001). Lady health workers in Pakistan have been trained to deliver services related to maternal and child health, including family planning information and supplies. This programme raised contraceptive use by rural women by almost 50 per cent and an evaluation found that doorstep delivery of contraceptives is central to achieving universal access to modern contraceptive methods in remote areas (Singh et al., 2009). Colombia has also had success with promotion of family planning services over a long period in a combined effort between the Ministry of Health and the NGO Profamilia. They were able to raise contraceptive use among married women from about 20 to 78 per cent between 1969 and 2007 (ibid).
Maternal, newborn and child care strategies
The reduction of deaths in children under five years of age but older than a month has unmasked the issue of deaths of newborns occurring in the first 28 days of life, or neonatal mortality. The proportion of deaths occurring in the first 28 days of life in under-five mortality has increased from 37 to 44 per cent between 1990 and 2012. 
      The causes of neonatal deaths are different from the causes in later childhood and are in most cases preventable. The best possible strategy for reducing them is through greater investment in family planning services and maternal health not only before and during pregnancy, but also at the time of labour and delivery as well as the first 24 hours after birth. This, in turn, requires larger investments to improve health systems (see next section). Furthermore, a number of preventive strategies and measures that focus on postnatal care can help to increase newborn survival rates (see Table IV.2), but these need to feature more prominently in the health efforts going forward. According to data from WHO (by May 2012), only 13 per cent of women received postnatal care in the first 24 hours in those developing countries where home births are very common. Moreover, many mothers who give birth in health facilities cannot return for postnatal care because of financial, social or other barriers.
      Because of the importance of reducing neonatal mortality and the type of preventive strategies and measures available to increase newborn survival rates, maternal health and child health have become more closely intertwined. Cost-effective health-care solutions have been combined as part of maternal, new-born and child health (MNCH) strategies. The core principle of these efforts is lifelong access to healthcare which takes a continuum of care approach for the mother starting from long before pregnancy (during childhood and adolescence) through pregnancy and childbirth. The continuum begins again with adequate newborn care for the new life. As appropriate, care can be delivered in the home and community, as well as health clinics and hospitals. 
      MNCH strategies have been implemented in a number of developing countries (WHO, UNFPA, UNICEF and the World Bank, 2010). The Countdown to 2015s Composite Coverage Index, which measures coverage by eight maternal and newborn related interventions along the continuum of care shows a strong correlation between countries with higher levels of interventions and lower rates of child mortality (UNICEF and WHO, 2014). Nonetheless, the increased coverage of the interventions varies dramatically across countries and also across wealth quintiles within countries. Even so, additional investments of merely US$5 per person per year addressing womens and childrens health (including interventions for MDG 6), have been projected to potentially yield high rates of return, producing up to nine times the economic and social benefit by 2035 in 74 countries with 95 per cent of the global maternal and child mortality burden (Steinberg et al., 2014). 
HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria, Tuberculosis (TB) and other diseases predate the MDGs but have resulted in faster progress towards eradicating these diseases since these goals were adopted. They have involved significant collaborations among international organisations and donors (included through aid and vertical funds as noted earlier), national and local governments as well as NGOs and community organisations. There are generally accepted, successful treatment and prevention regimes to combat these diseases, which going forward need to be scaled up in some countries. 
	
HIV/AIDS
Three of the most relevant interventions to combat HIV/AIDS are anti-retroviral therapy (ART), voluntary medical male circumcision (VMMC), and pre-exposure antiretroviral prophylaxis. It has been shown that the risk of transmission can be reduced by these three interventions by 96 per cent and over 60 per cent for the first two interventions, and by more than 40 per cent among men who have sex with men and by 49 per cent among people who inject drugs for the pre-exposure antiretroviral prophylaxis (UNAIDS, 2013). The effectiveness of these measures has relied extensively on their integration in a number of programmes, starting with those aimed at raising awareness about HIV/AIDS.
      Irrespective of their income level, countries with higher rates of ART provision have seen a correlation with lower death rates from HIV towards the end of the 2000-2015 period (Figure IV.9). The provision of ART has been expanded across a wide variety of countries, particularly those in sub-Saharan Africa, as a result of some reductions in costs related to the therapy. However, there are still significant issues with access to ART in a number of countries. In Botswana and Malawi, for example, the provision of low or no-cost ART treatments comes as a result of subsidization by governments or international organizations (UNAIDS, 2014). Zambia began distributing free ART drugs as early as 2005 and made steps to decentralize drug distribution to the district level in order to improve coverage. The country also instituted programmes to provide ART at all provincial hospitals for further coverage expansion (Snchez et al., 2015). 
      VMMC programmes to ensure that this procedure is available in addition to increasing the number of procedures performed (UNAIDS, 2014; Njeuhmeli, 2011). The procedure is cost-effective but there are still a significant number of men who do not have access to it (UNAIDS, 2013). The other important intervention, pre-exposure antiretroviral prophylaxis for men who have sex with men and those who inject drugs, still has relatively limited application. While the cost of required drugs makes this intervention somewhat more rare, the relative effectiveness rates as well as the existing medical infrastructure for distribution of ART related medicines makes it worth expanding this strategy further. 
      In order for said three policy interventions to be effective, it is necessary to raise awareness about HIV/AIDS, its transmission vectors, testing procedures and their availability, treatment options and prevention methods. Awareness starts at the top of the political leadership when it comes to HIV/AIDS. For example, Zambia and Tanzania have encouraged policymakers and political and community leaders to initiate discussions about the disease. Zambia established a cabinet committee devoted to HIV/AIDS and in Malawi, the President is also the Minister responsible for HIV/AIDS (Snchez et al., 2015). 
	
      Important interventions to reduce the risky behaviour that can lead to HIV transmission among youth and boost the use of preventative measures such as condoms include school-based sex education initiatives with proper teacher training, mass media campaigns and accessible information sources (ibid). Some successful initiatives include, for example, radio and TV programmes (Botswana); nationwide prevention campaigns through the inclusion of community figures (Burkina Faso); marketing of condoms by community organisations (Central African Republic); peer-led education seminars and interventions for migrant populations (Lao PDR); and, national call centres (India, Nigeria, the Philippines and South Africa). There have also been special efforts to involve men in various processes such as prevention of mother-to-child transmission (PMTCT) as well as issues of reproductive and sexual health and gender-based violence in the context of HIV (Nigeria and South Africa). In some cases (Tanzania) the awareness campaigns have been combined with testing for HIV, resembling the logic of integrated health events. Some of these initiatives have increased testing coverage rates for not only HIV, but also for reproductive issues and for TB. 
      In general, free voluntary counselling and testing (VCT) has proven to be a valuable method of reaching potentially affected populations and raising awareness with regard to prevention and treatment of HIV/AIDS. Snchez et al. (2015b) review a number of recent country progress reports by UNAIDS and governments on different AIDS programmes and identify interesting interventions. Proper testing of pregnant women to determine their HIV status is also the first step of PMTCT. There have been moves to integrate testing into standard clinical practice which has led to an increase in provider initiated counselling and testing (PITC), whereby HIV related interventions are often done automatically as part of other health services or as part of general check-ups. Uganda and South Africa have noted this as a successful factor in their anti-HIV efforts. Automatic testing initiated by Tanzania has also been an important factor in their HIV/AIDS programmes. VCT has also been integrated into programmes for PMTCT and early infant diagnosis (EID) in Uganda. PMTCT initiatives are particularly important due to their synergies with child mortality and their ties with ART programmes. In Zambia, a programme to improve coverage of EID through distribution of test results via text message (SMS) has been successful in expanding coverage, particularly among rural populations. The programme has also helped to improve postnatal follow-up care through appointment reminders.
      Tailoring the interventions to the affected populations is also another necessary factor in limiting the spread of HIV and helping those with the disease to more adequately live a longer life. An example of this is the development of drop-in centres for testing, counselling, treatment and other HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infection (STI) related medical interventions. Wellness Centres operated along the transport corridor between six East and South African countries are aimed at reaching sex workers, migrant labourers, and those involved in long-haul transportation. The centres also provide treatment for regular medical issues that these populations might encounter alongside HIV testing, which has helped to reduce stigma associated with the testing centres (UNDG, 2010). Similar centres have been operated since 1999 in Lao PDR and are targeted towards similar populations with the addition of specific programmes for transgender individuals (Snchez et al., 2015). India has taken important steps to address issues of transgender people, including ensuring high rates of coverage of prevention services and HIV testing services. In addition, India and Nepal have issued court rulings that recognize transgender people as a third gender and instructed the government to formulate special programmes to support their needs (UNAIDS, 2014). 
      Another important vector of prevention is the appropriate treatment of users of injectable drugs, who have a high prevalence of HIV/AIDS relative to the rest of the population in many developing countries. There are interesting country examples with regard to this issue (ibid.). Bangladesh is one of the few countries that have the necessary programmes meeting the recommended availability of needles and syringes per user of injectable drugs. In Nepal, combined harm reduction therapy approaches have significantly reduced HIV prevalence in Kathmandu, while China has vastly expanded the availability of opioid substitution therapy, an important aspect of harm reduction therapy. 
      As the death rate from HIV/AIDS has fallen, it has become more important for countries to put in place programmes that provide services and support for people living with the disease. Legal empowerment and education of people living with HIV (PLWH) along with community efforts have been important for reducing discrimination through a variety of programmes. These programmes include legal clinics in Kyrgyzstan, PLWH associations in Yemen, and the use of traditional leaders to work to combat the stigma attached to PLWH in Zambia (Snchez et al., 2015). In a similar vein, the Bar Hostess Empowerment programme in Kenya was developed to train local sex workers as paralegals, including learning about local and national laws and educating other sex workers about their rights (UNAIDS, 2014). A collaborative programme involving Lao PDR, Thailand and Australia has undertaken nutritional assessments of PLWH, combined education and counselling as well as capacity development for HIV-related service providers (Laos PDR) for both nutrition and general HIV related procedures. These programmes resulted in better nutritional status of PLWH as well as raising overall HIV testing rates (Snchez et al., 2015). Ecuador has introduced social protection measures to mitigate the negative effects of HIV/AIDS such as a CT programme targeting caregivers of children under 14 with HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS, 2014)which again corroborates the complementarity of social assistance programmes and health policies. 
       Malaria
Malaria remains a serious issue for many developing countries; it resulted in over half a millions deaths in 2013 (WHO, 2014b). There are a number of recommended interventions for combating and treating malaria that are agreed on by the WHO for prevention: free distribution of insecticide treated bed nets (ITNs), indoor residual insecticide spraying (IRS), and intermittent preventive therapy in pregnancy (IPTp). Rapid treatment of fevers in young children including rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) is also recommended for both prevention and treatment. Artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) have become the first-line treatment for uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria. Most country programmes are based on various ways of ensuring that these interventions are carried out successfully and reach the objective populations. 
      Malaria-affected countries whose percentage of children under 5 sleeping under ITNs increased, have seen important reductions in child mortality (Figure IV.10). Sleeping under an ITN has been shown to reduce the incidence of malaria and mortality among children under 5 (Demombynes and Trommerlova, 2012; Lim et al., 2011). IRS is another strategy that has proven effective in limiting (if not eliminating) the spread of malaria in many communities and regions (Pluess et al., 2010). A combination strategy of IRS and ITN use has been found to provide extra protection and should be implemented in high-risk areas (Hamel et al., 2011). The use of RDTs for children under five is important as it could reduce the rates of over-prescription and lead to better treatment outcomes (Mukanga et al., 2012). Its use has greatly expanded (WHO, 2013a) and it would potentially help in the treatment of other illnesses when malaria is ruled out (WHO, 2013b). 
      As part of efforts to reduce the death rate from malaria, the use of ACTs has proven to be particularly effective in many regions, although some countries in East Asia have seen a rise in resistance to ACTs by certain strains of malaria, which could be problematic for the future. Another issue is that there is limited data on progress for a number of countries for indicators such as malaria deaths or children under 5 with fevers who are being treated with malaria drugs. This is a particular issue for some of the countries with the most serious burdens. The Ebola epidemic in West Africa has also been a significant setback on malaria control efforts as resources have been understandably diverted toward more pressing needs (Hayden, 2014). 
      Some examples of countries where various programmes have been implemented include Sudan, which enacted a National Malaria Prevention and Control Programme (NMCP) that significantly increased the number of patients receiving ACT, provided free diagnosis and treatment of severe malaria (supported by the Global Fund), and expanded access to malaria services through an expansion of the number health facilities. To deal with malaria transmission vectors, there were also ITN distribution programmes, changes to irrigation projects designed to combat mosquito breeding grounds and spraying of residential areas with insecticide (UNDG, 2010). In Ethiopia and Senegal, there have been significant ITN distribution, IRS programmes and important increases in malaria diagnostic testing (PMI Annual Report, 2014). In Rwanda, the National Malaria Control Programme (PNILP), whose main interventions have been distribution of ITNs, behaviour change, communication and improvements in treatment, has led to a significant reduction in deaths from malaria (Ministry of Health of Rwanda, 2008). In this case, regular large-scale ITN distribution campaigns have been combined with existing vaccination campaigns and antenatal care programmes. Indonesia also integrated malaria treatment and prevention programmes into maternal and child health services, which included ITN distribution (UNDG, 2010). Zambia has also implemented malaria prevention and control programmes including ITN distribution, IPTp, IRS, and prompt treatment of malaria symptoms (Ministry of Health of the Republic of Zambia, 2010). Because of the important opportunities for synergies between all health-related MDGs, a number of operations have also included the distribution of ITNs in integrated MNCH strategies (Wallace et al., 2012). 
       Tuberculosis
There has been gradual progress in reducing TB cases ever since the MDGs were adopted. However, TB remains one of the deadliest communicable diseases and the relative co-incidence with HIV is fairly high (WHO, 2014a). In a similar vein to malaria, the treatments and strategies for TB tend to be much more generally applied across countries. 
      The Directly Observed Treatment Scheme (DOTS) is at the heart of efforts to stop TB, including case detection (by sputum smear microscopy). With regard to diagnostics, an example of a successful intervention includes the introduction of the GeneXpert system in South Africa. This system is better ablethan the traditional culture approachto diagnose TB and Rafimpicin resistance (a good indicator of drug resistant TB) simultaneously (Snchez et al., 2015). Universal (or almost full) coverage of DOTS has been achieved through national programmes in countries such as Zambia, India and Bangladesh as a review of national plans and programmes suggests (ibid). Zambia has significantly increased TB testing for HIV patients and India has trained more than 600,000 health care workers to carry out tests along with over 10,000 dedicated lab workers examining the samples. While expansion of DOTS has been successful in reducing mortality rates in many countries, this will not lead to an eradication of the disease; only expansion of immunization programmes can accomplish that (Enarson and Billo, 2007). However, while vaccination has proven quite effective for children, it has far less effect on pulmonary TB in adults, pointing to the need for continued investment and expansion in other prevention and treatment programmes (Jamison et al., 2006). 
Strengthening of the health system
The aforementioned policy interventions can only be delivered with equity and quality if there is a well-functioning health system. While all of the supply-side needs of health systems continue to be indispensable, including the availability and capability of health workers and infrastructure, the experience of the past years indicates that the positioning of the health system within society also plays a significant role. 
      The MDG process may, by and large, have encouraged a focus on specific discreet spending (for example, to scale up immunisations, free distribution of ITNs, and so on) rather than the broad healthcare reform that strengthens the underlying systems. For example, while vertical funds have been a critical source of resource mobilization, they also led to some distortion of health priorities for many countries due to their narrow focus on particular diseases, as noted. The dissociation between development policies and budgetary frameworks has also undermined policy coherence and generated spending gaps for achieving development goals, including the health MDGs, as noted in previous chapters. 
      Even so, there has unquestionably been a new push to strengthen health systems for many reasons, including the efforts to meet the health MDGs in an integrated manner as well as the rising importance of non-communicable diseases (NCDs). For example, the Global Fund has funded health system strengthening and there has been an important movement of universal health coverage (UHC), including leadership by the World Bank and the World Health Organization. UHC is likely to become an important aspect of the post-2015 development agenda. Furthermore, some of the unwarranted effects of the vertical funds (e.g., distortion of health priorities, operation out of the national health systems) were later recognized by the vertical funds themselves, prompting them to devote certain parts of their funds to supporting national health systems (United Nations, 2012). These international efforts are important to prompt efforts at the country level aimed at bridging existing gaps related to health personnel, infrastructure, and the positioning of health systems within society; they need to be continued and expanded.
Healthcare personnel
Health systems in developing countries face severe human resource constraints. This is evidenced by the fact that 40 million births in developing regions were not attended by skilled personnel in 2012, the bulk of which occurred in rural areas (United Nations, 2014). According to a comprehensive survey-based study, only 20 per cent of hospitals in Africa had full-time physicians (Manasyan et al., 2013). Thus the quality of health services is seriously undermined by the quantity and quality of healthcare personnel in developing countries.
      There are basically three main reasons behind the problem. First, some countries are not producing enough doctors, nurses, and technicians necessary for their healthcare system. Second, existing and new doctors, nurses, and technicians do not stay in some countries and instead migrate elsewhere. The problem of migration of skilled health professionals is particularly acute for sub-Saharan countries, which have lost a significant part of their healthcare personnel both to emigration and to the HIV/AIDS epidemic (Naicker et al., 2009; Tawfik and Kinoti, 2006; Awases et al., 2004). In another variant of this problem, healthcare professionals may leave the public health system and join the better-paid and better-equipped private sector. Third, some of the healthcare professionals who are left behind (in the country or in the public health system) do not possess high skills and may be less motivated to serve.
      Coping with the personnel challenge requires a multi-pronged strategy customized to the particular situation of a country. Those countries that are not producing enough doctors, nurses, and technicians need to boost the relevant educational capacity in the long run. These may necessitate setting and meeting education goals at the highest education levels. Complementary training interventions that can be quickly deployed are worth trying in the short-run. Examples of short-term training modalities in developing countries include broad-based training programmes for doctors, midwives and nurses (Botswana, the Gambia, Sierra Leone and Malawi), scholarship schemes (Uganda), and support for schools of midwives and the training of midwives in emergency and obstetric care (Zimbabwe) (Odusola, 2013). Shorter durations of training in developing countries has also allowed for task shifting that eases staffing pressure without compromising the quality of care (Huicho et al., 2008). 
      Short-term training initiatives have become particularly critical to combat HIV/AIDS or malaria. South Africa has had success with nurse-initiated management of patients on ART by which nurses have been trained and authorized to administer ART and monitor patients (Snchez et al., 2015). Many programmes for combatting malaria have also included training for treatment for doctors and medical assistants (Sudan), training on case management services for thousands of extension workers (Ethiopia), and home-based care programmes with trained community health workers (Rwanda) (ibid). 
	Traditional birth attendants (TBAs) are another resource to consider in certain countries where cultural acceptance, cost and distance to hospital services (see next section) prompt women to use them. Some countries no longer allow TBAs to attend deliveries, though. An alternative approach is to use TBAs strengths while overcoming their weaknesses; for example, by ensuring their roles become more complementary to those of trained medical personnel. TBAs can be trained in life-saving skills, in recognizing early danger signs, and in encouraging pregnant mothers to deliver in waiting homes and accompanying them during labour. Even in the most difficult contexts in Africa, such training has been possible as part of integrated maternal health efforts (Satti et al., 2012; Andemichael et al., 2010). Initial resistance by TBAs to become part of the system can be challenging but it can be effectively addressed through incentives and community intervention. 
      Low compensation and limited staff development opportunities feature among the key factors discouraging healthcare professionals in developing countries. A meta-analysis of 20 studies identified seven major themes with potential to motivate and retain health workers in developing countries including financial rewards, career development, continuing education, hospital infrastructure, resource availability, hospital management and recognition/appreciation (Willis-Shattuck et al., 2008). Financial rewards seem to be particularly important. Paying providers based on their performance in Rwanda, under the pay-for-performance (P4P) scheme, helped to boost the rates of uptake of HIV counselling and testing at a relatively minimal cost per patient (de Walque et al., 2013). Countries have also been able to expand the health workforce in a short time by broadening the recruitment pool and offering flexible career opportunities and non-traditional entry points to health workers (Maeda et al., 2014). Community health workers in Brazil and health extension workers in Ethiopia, for example, were found to require shorter periods of education and were quickly deployed. 
Infrastructure 
A characteristic of healthcare systems in many developing countries is the decaying infrastructure of their facilities as well as a lack of basic equipment, medical supplies and pharmaceuticals. Emergency obstetric and newborn care (EmONC) facilities, a critical intervention for reducing maternal mortality, typically do not have the capacity to deliver all the health services they are designated to provide in developing countries (Ameh et al., 2012). An important number of hospitals across different developing regions have been found to be unable to perform caesarean sections and possess deficient blood banks and oxygen supplies (Manasyan et al., 2013). In many instances health facilities are simply not available or those that are available are difficult to reach. This explains why far too many births still continue to occur outside health facilities, as noted. In contrast, developing countries that have increased the rate of institutional deliveries or introduced a centralized EmONC facility and ambulance transfer system at the local and district levels have averted an important number of maternal deaths (Tayler-Smith et al., 2013; Padmanabhan et al., 2009). 
      The infrastructure constraints that affect health outcomes are more than just the healthcare facilities themselves. While the provision of drinking water and basic sanitation contributes to prevent diseases such as diarrhoea, the related infrastructure continues to be at a poor state in many developing countries (see chapter V). Poor transport infrastructure also seriously hampers access to health facilities, especially in the face of emergencies and complications. Lack of time and transportation are among the most frequent barriers to women giving birth in a health facility in developing countries (Lerberg et al., 2014). Partnerships and local communities are important to ease transportation constraints while the necessary investments are realized (Odusola, 2013). Partnerships involving joint action of the private sector and NGOs in Africa, for example, are facilitating both provision of and access to transport to reach remote locations through mobile phones. Local communities are easing transport constraints in some African countries through subsidized or interest-free loans for pregnant women to attend check-ups or deliver their babies.
      Even when transportation is available, the distance to the health facilities is an issue as well, especially when pregnant women (approaching the stage of labour and childbirth) living in remote areas cannot easily reach hospitals or clinics. One life-saving intervention has been the establishment of maternal waiting homes in communities which target pregnant women by providing them with antenatal care and emergency obstetric care, among other potential services. This supply intervention works most effectively if there is demand for the services of waiting homes. Free food and free/subsidized transportation to these homes have been important incentives to prompt pregnant women to stay at these homes prior to their expected delivery dates. A number of studies for African countries point to the benefits of maternal waiting homes, including more deliveries attended by skilled personnel and willingness of pregnant women to seek antenatal care, resulting in a sharp reduction in maternal deaths (Andemichael et al., 2010; Ruiz, 2010; Satti et al., 2010). 
Integrated community case management
In many developing countries, particularly those with the lowest income, facility-based healthcare systems alone cannot provide adequate access to the best-known preventive health interventions and treatment. This is particularly true for countries where health policies fail to reach all targeted populations, especially populations that reside in the poorest, most marginalized areas that are hard to reach. In spite of the progress developing countries have seen in meeting health goals, relative inequalities in the health indicators are still appreciable partly because there are populations living in poverty that are hard to reach, as a comprehensive survey analysis spanning 64 developing countries has recently shown (Wagstaff et al., 2014). Countries with high child mortality rates are particularly affected. For example, in spite of the proven effectiveness of immunization in preventing measles, a fifth of children under the age of five in a number of countries are still not covered with measles containing vaccine (MCV1) (United Nations, 2014). Similarly, not all children in the developing world with a diarrhoeal disease receive oral rehydration therapy and most of these children reside in such populations. 
      Attention must then be paid to efforts that have succeeded in overcoming the barriers to expanding health policies to such underserved populations. Various examples presented above with regard to the policies point to the critical role of communities in helping extend coverage of key healthcare services to hard-to-reach populations (see also chapter VI for a broader discussion on the role of communities for development goals). As noted, there are numerous examples of health interventions at the community level covering preventive maternal and neonatal practices, micronutrient supplementation for children and women, national immunization days, integrated child health events, and others.
      However, community efforts need to be implemented in a coordinated and integrated manner, ideally as part of the health system, which is not the case in many of the community efforts noted earlier. UNICEF, WHO, and partners in many developing countries have supported the integrated Community Case Management (iCCM) strategy for a sustained reduction of child mortality, a strategy that is well integrated as part of the health system. It provides training, supply, and supervision of front-line workers at the community level in order to equip them with adequate skills to diagnose deadly childhood diseases and if needed treat themusing some of the interventions listed in Table IV.1. Moreover, iCCM strategies also enable community health workers to identify children with severe acute malnutrition through the assessment of mid-upper-arm circumference.
      Programmatic experience documented by Young et al. (2012) shows evidence of the effectiveness of these strategies. In Nepal, which has experience in iCCM of child illness, 69 per cent of children less than five years of age have access to treatment, and the case-fatality rate for acute diarrhoea and the proportion of severe pneumonia among acute respiratory infection cases across the country have significantly decreased. In Ethiopia, workers deployed in remote communities delivered two and a half times more treatments for three key diseases than all the facility-based providers in the same district. An iCCM study on pneumonia and malaria in Zambia found that 68 per cent of children with pneumonia received early and appropriate treatment from community health workers, and that overtreatment of malaria significantly decreased. The rapid treatment of fevers in young children believed to have malaria symptoms based on rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) have also been expanded though iCCT programmes, resulting in reductions in the rates of over-prescription and leading to better treatment outcomes (Mukanga et al., 2012; WHO, 2013a).
      Nonetheless, effective implementation of iCCM strategies can come at a high financial cost when these strategies require significantly stepping up policy support, training, supervision, performance maintenance, and regular supplies. In addition, community health workers are increasingly responsible for many health and development tasks, and expansion of their duties needs to be carefully considered in this light (Young et al., 2012). 
Healthcare as core social institution
Improved healthcare delivery necessitates more than increasing the supply of health workers and facilities and other important infrastructure. Health systems cannot just be addressed as mechanical delivery systems for clinical interventions. It is critical that they are positioned as core social institutions that are deeply embedded in the social, political and economic context of local and national settings, in which people-centred solutions are developed with the engagement of communities and also front-line health providers. One useful way to think about health systems is as having hardware and software dimensions (Sheikh et al., 2011). Hardware includes all the supply-side inputsas those mentioned above. Software includes the ideas and interests, values and norms, and affinities and power that guide actions and underpin the relationships among actors and elements of the system. All of these elements are critical to overall performance as well as the extent to which solutions are people-centred. In this perspective, like all institutions with a relevant role to play for development, health systems have important dynamics that determine how they function.
      Implementing people-centred solutions requires adequate quality of healthcare. Importantly, this includes not just clinical quality but also non-clinical quality. There have been a number of studies showing that high coverage of key clinical interventions has not had the expected impact on mortality because of a deficit of non-clinical quality (Souza et al., 2014).  A good example of a social policy that led to high coverage of a theoretically effective intervention is Indias Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY) CCT programme, which paid women to deliver in facilities. The evidence shows that the programme succeeded in raising institutional births significantly. However, a significant association between institutional birth proportion and the maternal mortality ratio has not been observed partly because of the low quality of care at institutions (Randive et al., 2013).
      Against this backdrop, the quality of care is an aspect of health systems that is being highlighted in new global MNCH strategies. In maternal health there is a new movement for respectful maternal care, which is now understood to be a huge barrier to access (Freedman and Kruk, 2014). It is especially important to ensure that womens health during pregnancy and childbirth (not to mention before pregnancy) is a basic human right. There are multiple resolutions in the Human Rights Council in recent years stating this as well as technical guidance on how to implement a rights-based approach to maternal mortality policy and programmes.  Because a large proportion of obstetric complications cannot be predicted or prevented but can be treated, the basic principle is that all women need to have access to emergency obstetric and newborn care, recognizing that the same interventions (for example, caesarean section) will be critical to save the lives of many newborns as well as many mothers.
Policy efforts and strengthening of health systems going forward 
This chapter has reviewed health policy interventions that are most commonly known for achieving health goals as well as preventive practices to tackle the problem of neonatal mortality, which was invisible early in the new millennium. In most instances these health interventions are cost-effective; otherwise they are effective but may have cost issues that should be addressed going forward. These policies still hold great potential to address unfinished business of the MDGs and pursue the broader post-2015 development agenda. The ways in which this holds true may vary from goal to goal, from sector to sector, from country to country, and even across developing regions. 
Areas of focus for policy efforts to address unfinished business
The concrete areas where the policy efforts should focus to complete unfinished business of the MDGs in developing countries are threefold.
      First, increased efforts to prevent neonatal deaths will be necessary as the proportion of deaths occurring in the first 28 days of life in under-five mortality has been increasing. Thus, implementing effective integrated solutions for both mothers and newborns, including family planning, will be critical going forward.
      Second, in spite of past progress, it will still be of paramount importance to continue combating infectious diseases such as pneumonia, diarrhoea and malaria as they continue to cause most of the deaths in children under age five. Reaching underserved populations as well as strengthening large-scale implementation interventions and addressing their cost issues will be critical steps to combat those as well as other diseases affecting broader populations. 
      Third, continued improvement of nutrition will be necessary too. Many under-five deaths still occur in children already weakened by undernutrition. Moreover, pregnant women also typically continue to face serious constraints to improve their nutrient intake, especially in low-income countries.
      While existing policy interventions to tackle neonatal mortality, infectious diseases, and nutrition deficiencies need no reinvention, they will not succeed without greater policy coherence and strengthening of the health system. 
Integrated solutions with greater policy coherence and effectiveness
Health policy interventions appear to have achieved the best results in terms of contributing to making faster headway towards the health MDGs when they featured as part of integrated strategies whose core principle is lifelong access to healthcare for women, newborns and older children. Not only are these strategies useful for integrating solutions against key diseases and life-threatening conditions but they can also: ensure that family planning becomes part of primary healthcare, tackle nutritional and environmental concerns that influence health, and create more awareness to prompt adequate healthy behaviours. However, integrating solutions may not be enough to achieve good outcomes if the three important following issues of coherence and effectiveness are not addressed going forward.
      First, some of the policy interventions of integrated health strategies have been seen to detract from others. For example, there have been instances of vaccination rates falling owing to higher costs of integrated interventions, longer service delivery times and other logistical issues. These issues should be addressed in order to increase the efficiency of integrated strategies for improving achievements on a variety of health development targets simultaneously. An adequate interface between development policies and budgetary frameworks, which was referred to in previous chapters, may contribute to policy coherence in health as well. However, the strengthening of the health system should be the most critical area of focus with a view to achieving greater policy coherence going forward.
      Second, the effectiveness of each policy intervention itself, even before it features as part of an integrated health strategy, is another important aspect to consider. The impact of policies has been determined by a multiplicity of factors, starting (again) with the adequacy of health systems both in terms of quantity and quality, but including also other factors such as relevance of the intervention in particular country contexts; extent to which the intervention reaches underserved and vulnerable populations or, where relevant, whether it can be implemented on a large scale; cost issues; and, peoples awareness of diseases and methods of prevention through healthy behaviours. 
      Third, some of the health policies used to pursue development goals seem to be reaching their limits as progress is achieved and the causes of disease and death change, particularly in middle-income countries. Going forward it is important that health systems are able to understand starting conditions to identify those interventions that should feature prominently in their strategies. Along the route, it will be important to closely monitor the effectiveness of policies in view of changing conditions. When inefficiencies arise, it will be critical to reallocate resources to undertake new and innovative effective interventions tailored to country realities.
Areas of focus for strengthening the health system 
Achieving integration, coherence and effectiveness of policies to tackle the problems of neonatal mortality, infectious diseases, and nutrition deficiencies will depend enormously on the functioning of the health system. A variety of factors closely associated with the limitations of health systems have held back progress with regard to all health MDGs. The supply-side needs of health systems will continue to be critical but it will also be necessary to pay more attention to the quality of care and the positioning of health systems as core social institutions. Strengthening the health system in developing countries will demand the following pathways.
      First, the shortage of skilled health personnel was not adequately addressed in many developing countries since the MDGs were adopted. Motivating and retaining health workers will be important to address the shortage, especially to prevent emigration of healthcare personnel from countries which severely lack them. Nonetheless, the lesson is that even if health workers can be motivated and retained, the critical policy for overcoming the existing deficit of health professionals is to produce more of them, especially through long-term education. 
      Second, short-term, broad-based training programmes for existing healthcare professionals will be required while the pool of new professionals rises through long-term education, especially in the least developed countries. Broadening the recruitment pool and offering flexible career opportunities and non-traditional entry points to health workers will also be important. The roles of traditional birth attendants should become complementary to those of trained medical personnel in the countries where they are still culturally accepted. Community health workers and health extension workers should feature as critical actors for the provision of health services as they typically require shorter periods of training and can be deployed quickly. They need to be formally integrated as a part of a comprehensive primary health system.
      Third, more traditional and non-traditional health facilities need to be constructed. The latter include maternal waiting homes as well as drop-in centres for testing, counselling, treatment and other medical interventions, in close proximity to communities and targeted populations. Incentives such as free food, free/subsidized transportation, and others will be important to create demand for less traditional health centres once they have been built. 
      Fourth, efforts for strengthening infrastructure should go beyond health facilities. Investing in transport infrastructure will be critical to expedite access to health centres. Governments should rely on partnerships and local communities to ease transport constraints, targeting those populations that most need medical attention while also incentivizing their demand for these services. Policies to reduce child and maternal mortality will have less effect if water and sanitation infrastructure does not improve.
      Fifth, health systems should be increasingly positioned as core social institutions that are deeply embedded in the social, political and economic context of local and national settings. Interventions should become people-centred and developed with the engagement of communities and front-line health providers. People-centred solutions will require adequate clinical and non-clinical quality of healthcare and a rights-based approach to policies and programmes. All women must have access to emergency obstetric and newborn care and the lives of people living with HIV/AIDS must be supported and improved through programmes. 
      Sixth, investment and operating costs involved in improving the functioning of the health systems will be high and can hamper sustainability going forward. This calls for the need to bridge existing health spending gaps. External assistance has to continue and increase for countries that do not have enough domestic resources to finance the spending required. Furthermore, vertical interventions should continue to be harmonised with the horizontal health system so that the former do not weaken the latter and instead strengthen it.

